tons)   560.50531.00544.85143.10257.87180.44272.96113.32 160.92Total (ODP
tons)  561.04511.82539.2296.54224.9081.7580.2844.2555.30Source: Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, -Ozone Layer Protection Office  *ODSs (ozone depleting substances) **ODP tons – amounts of consumed substances that deplete the ozone layer (MT) multiplied by the value of the ozone depletion potential(ODP) 
The Ozone Layer Protection Office conducted activities aimed at public awareness raising, thus making the public aware of the ozone layer depletion problem and directly involving certain groups.  In compliance with the Montreal provisions for monitoring the import, export and consumption of substances that deplete the ozone layer, a system for continuous monitoring of the sale of these compounds has been set up, for the purpose of which specific software has been developed. With this, the obligations imposed by the Protocol have been accomplished, conditions in the country are monitored, and the preparation of reports for the Multilateral Fund, the UNIDO, the Ozone Secretariat with UNEP and other international bodies is facilitated. With regard to the cross-border distribution of ozone depleting substances classified in the Annexes to the Montreal Protocol, and to the equipment containing such substances, companies must obtain an import/export permit from the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning. The table below shows the ratified amendments to the Montreal Protocol. Act Adopted on  Ratified by the Republic of Macedonia Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Vienna Convention  22 March1985 Succession from SFRY “Official  Gazette  of  SFRY” 1/90 Montreal Protocol 16 September 1987 Succession from SFRY “Official  Gazette  of  SFRY” 16/90 London Amendment 27-29 June 1990 4 June1998 “Official Gazette of RM’ 25/98  Copenhagen Amendment 25 November 1992 4 June 1998 ‘Official Gazette of RM’ 25/98 Montreal Amendment 15-17 September 1997 9 August 1999 “Official  Gazette  of  RM” 51/99 Beijing  Amendment 29.11-03.12.1999 23 January 2002 “Official Gazette of RM’ 13/02 
10. Is there a scheme, including a national competent authority, for the protection of laboratory animals as required by Directive 86/609? Has the Council of Europe Convention ETS 123 on the protection of laboratory animals been ratified and implemented? 
The Republic of Macedonia has not established a complete system for protection of laboratory animals as required by Directive 86/609EEC on the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes, nor has it designated a national competent authority for the protection of laboratory animals.  The European Convention for the Protection of Vertebrate Animals Used for Experimental and other Scientific Purposes (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 13/02) was ratified by the Republic of Macedonia in 2002, including the Amendment to the Protocol following its revision of 1998, adopted by the Council of Europe (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 13/03). The Republic of Macedonia was apprehensive of the implementation of certain articles of the Convention, in particular Article 17, paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 (animal marking procedures, keeping records of unmarked animals and procedure identification); Article 21, paragraphs 1 and 2 (application of the procedure for using the following animals: Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus, Cavia porcellus, Mesocricetus auratus, Canis familiaris and animal care obligations, especially concerning primates); and Article 27, paragraphs 1 and 2 (collection of statistical data). The Convention entered into force in the Republic of Macedonia on 01.08.2004. In accordance with the Law on Veterinary Health Care (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 28/98), the Veterinary Directorate as a body of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, is authorized to ensure animal well-being (prevention of unnecessary suffering and torturing, protection against animal exposure to unnecessary pain and injuries). According to Article 24, paragraph 8, animal torturing is prohibited when they are bred, kept, used and trained. Paragraph 9 also specifies that scientific research on animals can be conducted only in health care institutions and medical centres, as well as in veterinary, pharmaceutical and other institutions, and only if animals are not exposed to torture. At present, there is no specific legal act to regulate specific provisions ensuring animal well- being, corresponding to the European Union legislation, including the protection of vertebrate animals used for experimental or other purposes.  According to the Action Plan of the Republic of Macedonia for European Partnership, the Law on Animal Welfare is to be passed by the end of 2005, and the by-laws are to be adopted in 2006, which will ensure the regulation of this area.  The following institutions of the Ss. Cyril  and Methodius” University use laboratory animals in their study programmes: the Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, the Institute of Biology, the Faculty of Medicine, and the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine in Skopje. The Ministry of Education and Science coordinates the activities on data collection concerning the number and type of laboratory animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes in scientific institutions of the Republic of Macedonia. The Veterinary Institute of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, caries out all activities concerning the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes. The Faculty is authorised for the implementation of all activities in connection with the use of animals in experiments related to the development, manufacture, quality effectiveness and safety testing of drugs, foodstuffs and other substances or products, as well as the protection of the natural environment in the interest of human health and welfare.  The Institute for Cattle Breeding in Skopje, a public scientific institution, breeds vertebrate animals used for research purposes within the framework  of the National Breeding Programme for developing nucleus for dairy breeds and for identification and collection of indigenous domestic animals (cows and sheep). The research is carried out as a part of domestic projects, financed by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy in the Republic of Macedonia. Common standards and procedures are used in these types of research. 
H. Noise 

1. Is there a general noise abatement act or policy? What are the main features of the noise control policy (emission standards, planning standards)? 
In the Republic of Macedonia, the noise control is regulated by several laws and by-laws:  
Law on Harmful Noise Prevention (“Official Gazette of  SFRY” No. 21/84, 10/90 and “Official Gazette of RM” No.62/93) 
This is the general law regulating protection against noise. Article 4 of the General Provisions and Chapter 2 “Conditions and Measures for Noise Prevention” of this Law determine the rights and obligations of legal entities and natural persons in terms of  protection against harmful noise, as well as the conditions and measures for noise prevention and its abatement in the living environment.  Noise prevention and abatement are ensured by spatial and urban plans, selection of technology, preparation of investment plans and technical documents for the construction of facilities, installations and devices that produce noise. The Law does not include specific standards for the maximum permissible noise level in the living environment.  The Law does not regulate emission standards or standards on harmful noise planning for different noise sources, such as motor vehicles, aircrafts, rail traffic, construction machines, household appliances and other noise sources. 
Decision on Determining the Cases of and Conditions for Regarding the Harmful Noise as Disturbing to Citizens (“Official Gazette of  RM” No. 64/93) 
This Decision was adopted on the basis of the Law on Public Peace and Order Disturbance (“Official Gazette of SFRY” Nos. 25/72, 29/83, 34/83, 51/88, 19/90, and “Official Gazette of RM” No. 26/93). Article 3 of the Decision stipulates the maximum permissible noise level in the premises of buildings in which peace and order are required during night and day, while Article 4 stipulates the maximum permissible noise level in areas where peace and order are required during night and day. 
Order on Compulsory A-Testing of Motor Vehicles with Minimum Four Wheels (Homologation) with regard to Noise (“Official Gazette of  RM” No. 16/97) 
The Order is in line with Article 21 of the Law on Regulation of Technical Requirements for Products and Conformity Assessment (“Official Gazette of RM” No.55/02). Item 5 of the Order contains a table of permissible noise levels caused by different types of vehicles subject to homologation. 
Rulebook on General Measures and Norms for Protection at Work against Noise in Working Facilities (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 29/71) 
The Rulebook determines the permissible noise levels, values of the sound pressure level of the noise and the permissible time of exposure to noise.  
Rulebook on Standards and Norms for Spatial Planning (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 2/02, 50/03) 
Article 49 of the Rulebook defines the distance from the edge of the road to the residential area (green belt). In order to ensure protection against noise and air pollution, when planning new roads, residential areas are to be built away from roads, the minimum distance from the side of the road to the residential area being: National roads  50 meters (20 m.) Regional roads 40 meters (15 m.) Local roads 20 meters (10 m.) Main streets   20 meters (5 m.) Venue streets   20 meters (3 m.) Service streets 10 meters (3 m.) Residential area streets 5 meters (3 m.) The values in brackets denote distances in cases of urban revitalization, i.e. road reconstructions. In cases of existing structures and facilities, when the provision of green belts for noise protection is not possible, noise reduction fences should be planned. 
The Law on Tourism and Catering Industry (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 23/95, 33/00, 25/02, 48/02, 38/03) 
According to Article 5 of the Law, the providers of catering and tourist services must present evidence of the fulfilment of requirements related to noise protection conditions. 
Rulebook Amending the Rulebook on Minimum Technical Requirements for Catering and Tourist Operations and Requirements for Classification of Tourist Facilities (“Official Gazette of RM” No.59/95, 19/96, 38/97, 57/97, 41/04) 
According to Article 15-v, disco clubs may play music with the maximum noise level of 35 decibels after 1 a.m.  
Law on Catering Industry (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/04) 
Article 6 of this Law prescribes that the fulfilment of the conditions for noise protection prescribed in the Law is necessary for performing catering services.  
Law on Sanitary and Health Inspection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 19/95) 
According to the provisions of this Law, the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate is competent to supervise all noise sources which could be harmful to human health and to undertake appropriate measures, such as: ban on the construction, extension and reconstruction of building structures or on use of noise sources unless appropriate conditions for noise protection have been fulfilled; -  order on the elimination of faults of noise sources followed by a request for the initiation of misdemeanour procedure before competent body if the order is not observed; provision of prevention measures for noise elimination. The following standards are used for noise measurement and noise protection: Noise and noise insulation are measured and demonstrated through prescribed methods and instruments for sound level measurements and appropriate filters in accordance with the requirements of the International Electro technical Commission IEC – publications 179, 225, 651 and 804, as well as ANSI S 1.4 standards. ISO 3746 standard is also used. The existing national standards (measuring methods) are not harmonized with the European norms. The spatial planning standards described in “The Environment” part of the Spatial Plan of the Republic of Macedonia, require that, in accordance with the planning provisions, the renovation, revitalization of regions and noise prevention are to be facilitated with specific plans and programs for noise protection.  The Draft Law on Environment, which is a framework law, regulates noise in several of its parts: -  Protection of the media and the areas of the environment is achieved by undertaking measures and activities for protection from harmful impacts, including noise and vibrations;  The right to access to environmental information is exercised with reference to all information in written, visual, audio, electronic or any other form, in which noise is included.  The National Environmental Action Plan addresses noise protection issues. -  The Local Environmental Action Plans address protection against noise and vibrations resulting from business and other activities. -  Within its supervision the State Environment Inspectorate has the right to verify whether transportation means that do not fulfil the requirements prescribed for emissions of mobile sources of pollution and noise are manufactured or imported. -  Inspectors of the Environment supervise the implementation of protection measures against harmful noise. The Programme for Approximation of the National Legislation to the Legislation of the European Union and the Action Plan for European Partnership foresee adoption of the Law on Harmful Noise Prevention and by-laws for noise control. These activities are coordinated by a work group established within the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning. The law will incorporate EU Directives referring to noise, in which the Council Directive on the Assessment and Management of Environmental Noise 2002/49/EC of 25 June 2002 is of primary importance. So far, the analysis of differences between the existing national legislation and EU legislation has been completed. The Law on Harmful Noise Prevention and the secondary legislation acts on noise control, as well as emission and planning standards, are to be adopted by the end of 2006. 
2. Which noise sources are covered by this legislation, in particular what is the situation as regards road, rail, aircraft, construction plant and equipment, industry? 
Article 2 of the Law on Harmful Noise Prevention (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 21/84, 10/90 and “Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/93 ) covers all types of noise: all installations, devices, machines, transportation means and appliances producing noise in the environment. However, it does not contain precise provisions for their control and treatment.  The Order on Compulsory A-Testing of Vehicles on Four Wheels (homologation) with Respect to Noise (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 16/97) defines the limit levels of noise for all vehicles with minimum four wheels. In compliance with Article 143 of the Draft Law on Air Aviation, an aircraft using the Macedonian air space must hold a Noise Loudness Certificate during take-off, flight and landing, issued by the Civil Aviation Authority on the basis of a previously obtained opinion by the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning (MEPP). A foreign aircraft will not be allowed to use the Macedonian air space if noise loudness certificates and gas emission certificates cannot be presented. The maximum allowed level of noise during take-off, flight and landing is prescribed by the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning. The future Law on Harmful Noise Prevention will cover all sources of noise, provide foundations for by-laws on noise control standards and create an institutional framework. 
I. Civil Protection 

1. Which administrative bodies (Ministries, agencies, etc.) are responsible for developing the civil protection policy? 
According to the existing laws and regulations, the following administrative bodies are competent for developing civil protection policy: The Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, the Ministry of Defence and the bodies of the local self-government units. At present, there is a special Sector within the Ministry of Defence responsible for the implementation of the civil protection policy. According to the Law on Protection and Rescue (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 36/04, 49/04), protection and rescue are assigned a special status, beyond the authority of the defence. Under the Law, the Protection and Rescue Directorate is established as an independent state administrative body authorized to prepare, organize and implement the policy and activities for protection and rescue of people and material goods in the country. According to the Law, the Protection and Rescue Directorate takes over the Civil Protection Sector within the Ministry of Defence and the Fire Protection Sector within the Ministry of Internal Affairs. According to the Law on Protection and Rescue, the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, adopts the National Protection and Rescue Strategy of the Republic of Macedonia for a period of 5 years, upon the proposal of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopts the Annual Protection and Rescue Action Programme including general procedures for implementing the National Protection and Rescue Strategy. The Government also adopts the Protection and Rescue Plan, including the preventive and operational measures and activities, as well as the protection and rescue procedures. This Plan is founded on the Assessment of Danger Posed by  Natural Disasters, Epidemics, Epizootiologic, and other disasters.  The bodies of the local self-government units, in cooperation with and upon prior obtained opinion by the Protection and Rescue Directorate, adopt protection and rescue plans for their territory. The role of the Directorate is to ensure harmonization of these with the protection and rescue documents prescribed under the national plan. The remaining state administrative bodies, as well as some other agencies and bodies, within their basic competences and activities, play a logistic role and participate in planning and organizing the civil protection, in compliance with the Civil Protection Plan and the current needs. The competences of these bodies are founded by certain laws, such as: the Ministry of Interior (TheLaw on Fire Fighting Services -“Official Gazette of RM”67/04, the Law on Storage and Protection against Inflammable Liquids and Gases – “Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 15/76, 51/88, 19/90, and “Official Gazette of RM” 12/93, and the Law on Protection from Explosive Materials  –“Official Gazette of SFRY” No.4/78, 10/78, 51/88, 36/90 and “Official Gazette of RM”12/93 ), the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning (Draft Law on Environment), and the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Ministry of Transport and Communications, and the Ministry of Health. The system also includes other agencies and legal entities, such as: Hydro Meteorological Directorate, Institute for Earthquake Engineering and Engineering Seismology, Republic Institute for Health Protection, Red Cross of the Republic of Macedonia, certain public enterprises and faculties within the Universities in the Republic of Macedonia. 
2. What is the general approach and organisation as regards civil protection? 
The general approach to and organisation of the civil protection so far has been regulated by the Defence Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 42/01, 5/03),  following the principles of massiveness and engagement of all state administrative and business entities, including citizens, with the obligation of establishing appropriate units for civil defence.  These units were non-operational and inert and were activated by a mobilization procedure. They were effective only in cases of very serious accidents. The National Headquarters of Civil Protection and the respective Regional Headquarters of civil protection established cooperation and acted simultaneously with line ministries, the Army and other entities. In order to ensure protection and rescue, manage and direct the activities of all participants during the application of the protection and rescue measures, the Headquarters conduct data collection and analysis and report on the consequences of accident and the measures undertaken for their elimination. Currently, the civil defence consists of professional and reserve structures. The general approach towards the civil protection and its organisation in the Republic of Macedonia is determined by the Law on Protection and Rescue (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 36/04, 49/04), which reforms the current civil protection system. According to the Law on Protection and Rescue, protection and rescue are of public interest and are to be organised as a single system for detecting and preventing disasters, as well as eliminating their consequences. Apparently, in order to ensure protection and rescue, protection and rescue units are formed as Protection and Rescue Forces. The Protection and Rescue Forces include the National and Territorial Protection and Rescue forces. National forces are formed to operate in a region of a certain number of self-government units, which according to their natural and geographical features constitute a unit. National forces as regional cover 30 regions. The national protection and rescue forces are composed of quick response teams founded by the Protection and Rescue Directorate. The teams are formed in accordance with different specialization fields, and their type, number, personnel, and equipment are determined by means of a decision of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The teams are composed of the Directorate employees, experts from the state administrative bodies and other public offices and citizens – experts, who sign contracts for participating in the work of the teams. The Territorial Protection and Rescue Forces are formed to operate in the territory of self-government units and are formed by self-government units, trade companies, public companies, institutions and services in their territories.  The National forces are formed by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The type, size and organisation of the protection and rescue forces are determined by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.  The protection and rescue forces are composed of a permanent and a reserve structure. Permanent structure is composed of the employees of the Protection and Rescue Directorate and municipal professional fire units. Reserve structure consists of the military reservists, unless engaged in army activities, as well as citizens who must participate in the activities of the protection and rescue forces.  The methods of supplying staff for the reserve structure of the protection and rescue forces and the equipment requirements are to be regulated by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia by means of a decree.  The protection and rescue forces are mobilized on the basis of a decision made by the Director of the Protection and Rescue Directorate. The mobilization includes activities and procedures that put the organised protection and rescue forces in state of emergency. The Director of the Directorate decides whether the national protection and rescue forces will be engaged. The territorial forces, on the other hand, are under the authority of the respective self-government unit. In cases of disasters and other accidents, the Protection and Rescue Forces operate as a single protection and rescue system, activated by their founding body. The Protection and Rescue Forces are managed by protection and rescue headquarters. The Protection and Rescue Directorate sets up the General Headquarters consisting of experts appointed by the Government, which is under the authority of the Director of the Directorate. The General Headquarters reports to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The Directorate also organises the work of regional organisational units with regional headquarters managing the regional national protection and rescue forces. The methods of work and decision making of the General Headquarters are regulated by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, while regional headquarters are regulated by the Director of the Protection and Rescue Directorate. 
3. Are there specific measures aiming at protecting the environment in the case of a disaster? 
Environment protection is incorporated in the protection and rescue system of the Republic of Macedonia and is regulated by the Law on Protection and Rescue (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 36/04, 49/04). According to this Law, protection against natural disasters, epidemics, epizootics, epiphytotics and other disasters is accomplished by undertaking certain organisational, technical and other measures, and application of technical and other means for immediate individual and collective protection of people, animals, plants, estates, cultural heritage and the environment against their consequences. Simultaneously, rescue is defined as the undertaking of measures and activities for protecting people at risk, animals, plants, estates and cultural heritage against the consequences of accidents. The protection and rescue activities are applied in the process of citizens’ protection, as well as the protection of natural resources, flora and fauna, goods of public welfare and objects and buildings of special cultural and historical importance. The Chapter on Prevention and Control of Disasters involving Hazardous Substances of the Draft Law on Environment defines in detail the environment protection in case of disaster, for the purpose of which the EU Directive 96/82/EC, known as SEVESO II, has been transposed.  The Draft Law on Environment determines the manufacturing, transport and storage activities with regard to which installation operators are obliged to undertake all the measures necessary for disaster protection and control of their impacts on the environment and human health, as well as their obligation to inform the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning thereon. The law authorizes the Ministry to prescribe the quantities of hazardous substances by means of a separate act, in compliance with EU Directive 96/82/EC. Operators are required to prepare an internal emergency plan prescribing measures that are to be undertaken within the system in case of a disaster and to deliver it to self-government units. The content of internal plans is prescribed by the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning.On the basis of the internal emergency plan, the competent body of a self-government unit elaborates the External Emergency Plan. The operators and self-government units are obliged to make these plans available to the public. The protection and rescue plans adopted by the competent bodies stipulate measures for environment protection during accidents, depending on the risk assessment and the anticipated conditions, to be undertaken by the entities involved in the protection and rescue system. According to the Law on Protection and Rescue, legal entities whose activities may endanger the environment are obliged to set up and maintain, on their own expenses, an early warning system and emergency services and forces, and to proportionally finance the training of the self-government units, depending on the scale and level of risk caused by their business activity. The Fire Protection Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 67/04) prohibits devices, equipment and fire protection means using substances harmful for the environment and the ozone layer. The Ministry for Environment and Physical Planning, in cooperation with the Protection and Rescue Directorate publishes a list of substances, as well as the criteria for application, storage, release and destruction of the substances used for fire protection, which endanger the environment and the ozone layer. Segments of the Spatial Plan of the Republic of Macedonia also encompasses the environment with respect to protection and rescue of people and material goods.  
4. Does the civil protection organisation include a component for international co-operation and if so, what is the nature of this? 
The protection and rescue system in the Republic of Macedonia set up with the Law on Protection and Rescue (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” 36/04,49/04) includes aid delivery to other countries struck by major natural disasters, epidemics, epizootics, epiphytotics and other accidents, as well as receiving aid from other countries.  The international cooperation of the Republic of Macedonia is accomplished by sending humanitarian protection and rescue aid to other countries and by organising training, exercises and humanitarian activities for the protection and rescue forces abroad. The international cooperation includes receiving humanitarian aid and help from the protection and rescue forces of other countries. With the aim of eliminating the impacts of major disasters that cannot be prevented and the impacts of which cannot be mitigated by national protection and rescue forces, the Government makes a decision to engage international protection and rescue forces or the forces of the collective safety and defence system at the request of the Commander of the General Headquarters. In their protection and rescue activities, local self-government units may establish cross-border cooperation with municipalities they share borders with. The manner of this cooperation is determined by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.  The same Law authorises the Protection and Rescue Directorate to plan and conduct the international protection and rescue cooperation, and to organise exercises and participation in collective protection and rescue systems outside the territory of the Republic of Macedonia.  So far, the international civil protection cooperation has developed through the Individual Partnership Programme of the Republic of Macedonia with NATO (NATO-IPP Individual Partnership Programme), as well as within the Third Working Table of the Stability Pact, in which the Republic of Macedonia is a part of the Disaster Preparedness and Prevention Initiative for SEE (DPPI). Within the framework of the SEDM process – Southeastern Europe Defence Ministerial Process for Defence Cooperation in Southeastern Europe, the Republic of Macedonia actively participates in the SEESIM (South Eastern Europe Simulation Network) project by taking part in the joint exercises. In addition, it is a signatory to the Agreement on founding the CMEP – Civil Military Emergency Planning ratified by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia in 2004. This cooperation enables the improvement of standard operative procedures used when requesting or offering international aid.  In addition to the above, the international cooperation includes contribution to the Committee of Challenges of Modern Society within NATO (CCMS – NATO) and, as a member of the group of Southeastern European Defence Ministers (SEDM), participation in the South East European Simulation exercises (SEESIM).  Additional cooperation has been established with: UNICEF, Senior Civil Emergency Planning Committee (SCEPC – EAPS format), NATO – Civil Protection Committee (CPC), especially in the fields of warning and detection systems (GOEWDS – Group of Experts on Warning and Detection System) and aid cooperation in humanitarian and natural disasters (EADRCC - Euro Atlantic Disaster Response Coordination Centre). 5. Are there specific strategies or measures aimed at protecting the population from disasters? 
The national protection and rescue concept is regulated by the Law on Protection and Rescue (“Official Gazette of RM” No.36/04, 49/04). The Law foresees the development of Protection and Rescue National Strategy which is now in its preparatory phase. Other complementary protection and rescue documents to be drawn up include the Action Programme, Assessment, Plan as well as methods of implementing the organisation and the capacities of the protection and rescue forces and resources. Guidelines on the population protection against disasters are also presented in the Spatial Plan of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 39/04), under the following expert studies: Guidelines for protection against war destructions, Protection measures against natural disasters, Protection measures against technical and technological accidents, -  Conditions concerning the occurrence of seismic and technical and technological disasters and other accidents and protection against those. The Law on Protection and Rescue determines the protection and rescue measures encompassing measures for the accommodation of endangered and injured population. This includes the reception, accommodation and provision of basic existential conditionsforendangered and injured population that the country and the local self-government units are to provide at their own expenses.  
J. Nuclear Safety: Radiation Protection 

1. What is the status of compliance with the Euratom Treaty and Euratom acquis provisions concerning radiation protection? In particular: a) Is there an active network of measuring stations to monitor environmental radioactivity? b) Regarding environmental assessment and review of the licensing of new sites and nuclear installations, please state if your country’s present legislation provides for environmental assessment requirements and public participation/review during the licensing process. 
a)  The continuous monitoring of radioactive contamination of the environment in the Republic of Macedonia is carried out in compliance with the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety (“Official Gazette of RM” No.48/02), the Rulebook on Locations and Time Intervals for Systematic Examination of Contents of Radionuclide in Environment with Early Detection and Notification of Environmental Radioactive Contamination (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No.84/91) and the Rulebook on Maximum Limits of Environmental Radioactivity Contamination and Decontamination (“Official Gazette of SFRY” Nos. 8/87, 27/90).  Locations and time intervals of the systematic examination of contents of radionuclide in the air, soil, rivers, lakes, solid and liquid precipitation, drinking water and foods and feedingstuffs, as well as the notification system of radioactive contamination are determined on the basis of the Rulebook on Locations and Time Intervals for Systematic Examination of Contents of Radionuclide in Environment with Early Detection and Notification of Environmental Radioactive Contamination.  The Republic Institute for Health Protection (RIHP) of the Republic of Macedonia is authorised to carry out the monitoring of radioactive environment contamination, i.e. measure radionuclide in the air, soil, water and food.     With the aim of assessing the risk of radiation the population in the Republic of Macedonia is exposed to, the following parameters are examined: total beta and total alpha radioactivity, presence of fission products with gamma spectrometric analysis and concentrations of natural uranium in different environmental media.  The contents of radionuclide are measured in accordance with the prescribed dynamics and methods:  The air in Skopje and Gevgelia, continuously 24 hours a day; The atmospheric sediments in Skopje on a daily basis, 24 hours a day, and in Gevgelia and Ohrid on a monthly basis; The soil in Skopje and Stip,untilled and tilled, every year in April and October;  The waters of the rivers Vardar and Lepenec, on a daily basis, while the waters of the Ohrid Lake at St. Naum location are examined by specific measuring of Sr in total quarterly samples;   The water of the water supply facilities, and mineral waters, as well as feedingstuff (grass and straw stacks) in the regions of Skopje, Gevgelia, Mavrovo, Ohrid and Prilep; A regular systematic examination of the outdoor radiation is continuously carried out in Skopje. With the aim of early detection and notification of radioactive environment contamination as a result of transboundary transport, the Hydro Meteorological Directorate measures the absorbed dose of gamma radiation in the air in Lazaropole and Berovo, at  the time and with methods prescribed by the Rulebook on Network Determination and the Programme on the Performance of Meteorological Stations of National Interest (“Official Gazette of  SFRY” No. 50/90), and inform the authorised bodies thereof.  b)  The Spatial Plan of the Republic of Macedonia adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 39/04) and its part on energy sources and infrastructure do not foresee a construction of a nuclear installation.  According to the Law on Environment and Nature Protection and Promotion (“Official Gazette of RM” No.13/03 consolidated text), investors are obliged to prepare an environmental impact assessment study for projects hazardous to the environment and human health. Directive 97/11 amending and supplementing the Council Directive 337/85 on environmental impact assessment of particular public and private projects and the Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context have been completely transposed in the Draft Law on Environment.   The Draft Law regulates the procedure for environment impact assessment (EIA). The by-laws, which are currently in preparatory phase, will determine the projects for which this procedure is compulsory, as well as the criteria for generally approved projects for which the necessity of EIA will be determined on a case-by-case basis. All other projects not included in the above regulation will be subject to an environmental impact assessment study. The body authorised for the implementation of the Project cannot issue a permit for the project implementation unless the investor presents a prior acquired approval of the environmental impact assessment study by the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning.  While the EIA procedure is in process, the authorised body consults the concerned local self-government units, the public and the environment protection and improvement NGOs by providing the required documents, publishing announcements and launching public debates on the web site of the Ministry.  
2. What is the status of the legislation in the area of radiation protection in your country? Please provide a copy of existing legislation together with relevant regulations or government decrees in the following areas: a) Health protection of the population; b) Health protection of workers; c) Medical applications of ionising radiation; d) Emergency preparedness and information; e) Contamination of foodstuffs and feedingstuffs; f) Shipments of radioactive waste; g) Management of high activity sealed sources and orphan sources. 
By adopting the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 48/02), see 22_Annex_06, the Republic of Macedonia has to a great extent harmonised its legislation on ionizing radiation protection with international safety standards by which the Council Directive 96/29/Euratom, the Council Directive 97/43/Euratom and the Basic Safety Standards are transposed, as recommended by the International Atomic Energy Agency.  The aim of this Law is to improve the degree of human health protection from harmful effects of ionizing radiation, as well as to provide maximum safety during radiation sources operation. The Law regulates the control system of all ionizing radiation sources and provides for human and environment protection against exposure to ionizing radiation. The following are the main principles regulating environmental legislation: Protection of humans against adverse impacts of ionizing radiation; Provision of safety for the ionizing radiation sources; Justification of the use of ionizing radiation sources; Optimum exposure of people and the environment; Limitation of all types of activities with ionizing radiation sources;  Environment protection against the adverse impact of ionizing radiation; and Safe storage of spent ionizing radiation sources. The Law foresees the establishment of Radiation Safety Directorate as an independent body in charge of administrative and technical matters which will report to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The Directorate will set up a Radiation Safety Commission as an advisory body staffed with officials of different ministries. Until the establishment of the Directorate, the Ministry of Health is in charge. The activities of the Radiation Protection Center are performed by the Republic Institute for Health Protection under the conditions stipulated by the Directorate. In order to enforce the aforementioned law, the Directorate may also request professional services from other authorised professional institutions, see 22_Annex_07The Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety stipulates the conditions under which ionizing radiation sources may be used. Legal entities may commence an activity only upon prior acquisition of the relevant permit (import, export, distribution, transport, storage, disposal, renting and other activities in connection with the ionizing radiation sources) of the Radiation Safety Directorate. At present, the conditions for distribution and usage of radioactive materials, X-ray apparatus and other devices emitting ionizing radiation and the protection measures in relation to these sources are prescribed with by the Rulebook on Placing on the Market and Using Radioactive Materials above the Defined Limit of Activity, X-ray Apparatuses and Other Apparatuses that Produce Ionizing Radiation as well as on the Protective Measures Against Radiation of those Sources (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 40/86, 45/89), see 22_Annex_08The Law specifies the conditions under which people are considered to be exposed to ionising radiation and classifies them as: exposure of population, occupational exposure (persons under the age of 18, pregnant women and persons suffering from diseases contraindicated to ionising radiation sources) and medical exposure. This Law provisions are also applied in cases of: potential exposure, exposure during radiation accidents and extended radiation. a)  Health Protection of the population Health protection of the population against serious harmful effects of ionizing radiation is regulated by the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety, see 22_Annex_06, and the Law on Environment and Nature Protection and Promotion (“Official Gazette of RM” No.13/03 consolidated text). With respect to protection of the population in normal conditions, the legal entity using ionizing sources is obliged to adhere to the rules prescribed in the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety, and the corresponding provisions. If the source operation causes release of radioactive substances in the environment, thus causing a significant adverse impact on human health and the environment, the legal entity is obliged to remunerate the damages. The legal entity is also obliged to monitor and control the approved releases of radioactive substances in the environment and to notify the Directorate and the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning. This Law also foresees the adoption of the Programme and time intervals for systematic examination of all release points, on the proposal of the Directorate.  Protection of the population against ionizing radiation is also regulated by the Law on Environment and Nature Protection and Promotion. This Law regulates the rights and obligations of the Republic of Macedonia, local self-government units, and the rights and obligations of legal entities and natural persons in providing conditions for nature and environment protection and improvement, including ionizing radiation protection. Maximum limits of environmental radioactivity contamination are prescribed by the Rulebook On Maximum Limits of Radioactive Contamination of Environment and on Decontamination (“Official Gazette of SFRY” Nos. 8/87, 27/90) , see 22_Annex_09. This Rulebook determines the maximum limits of radioactive contamination for air, drinking water and human foodstuffs specified by the annual intake limits of radionuclide in human body by inhalation and ingestion and through derived concentrations. The individual annual intake for a group of individuals must not exceed 1/10 of the limit of the annual intake for persons working in the conditions of ionizing radiation, and the average annual individual intake must not exceed 1/100 of the annual intake limits of radionuclide in a human body. This Rulebook determines the annual intake limits of radionuclide in a human body through inhalation and ingestion and through the derived concentrations in the air and drinking water.  The monitoring of concentration of radionuclide in the environment (air, residential rooms, drinking water, foodstuffs and cattle feed) and the manner of early notification of environmental radioactive contamination (in emergency situations) are specified in the Rulebook on the Places and Time Intervals for Systematic Testing of the Radionuclide Contents in Environment by Early Detection and Notification of Radioactive Contamination of the Environmental (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No.84/91), see 22_Annex_10,. The Rulebook on the Limits Over which the Population and Persons Working with Sources of Ionizing Radiations must not be Exposed to Radiation, on Measuring the Extent of Exposure to the Ionizing Radiations of the Persons that Work with the Sources of those Radiations and Testing the Contamination of the Working Environment (“Official Gazette of SFRY” Nos. 31/89, 63/89), see 22_Annex_11, specifies the radiation limits used as a basis for the protection of the population and individuals working with ionizing radiation sources. 
Chapter 3 of this Rulebook specifies the dose limits for the population. So, for individuals in the population, an individual annual effective dose is 1mSv, in case of equal exposure of the whole body. For a limited period of several years, it can be 5mSV, but only if the average annual effective dose during the person’s life does not exceed the basic limit of 1mSv. For individuals in the population, an individual annual equivalent dose for a certain body organ or tissue is 50mSv. The total collective dose of the population must not exceed the value resulting from the total number of population multiplied by individual effective dose for the population. b)  Health Protection of Workers The Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety, see 22_Annex_06, specifies the profiles of persons who can work with ionizing radiation sources on the grounds of their qualifications and health status. Persons under 18 years of age, pregnant women, and persons suffering from disease with contraindications to ionizing radiation sources are not allowed to work with ionizing radiation sources. This also refers to breastfeeding women working with open ionizing radiation sources. In addition, the health protection of workers is regulated by several rulebooks. One of the segments is regulated by the Rulebook on Professional Education, Health Conditions and Medical Examinations of the Persons that can Work with Sources of Ionizing Radiation (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 40/86), see 22_Annex_12This Rulebook specifies that only persons with appropriate professional education may work with ionizing radiation sources and perform tasks in relation to the protection against ionizing radiation.  The details for the medical check-ups of persons involved in these activities before their employment, while working with ionizing radiation sources, as well as the time intervals for the medical check-ups are specified in the same Rulebook, which incorporates the provisions of Directive 96/29/Euroatom in Chapter III on health monitoring of occupationally exposed workers. In compliance with the same Directive, the provisions of Chapter VII on significant increase of exposure to natural sources radiation are not in force in our country simply because the places of increased radiation from natural sources have not been registered in the Republic of Macedonia. With respect to the aircraft crew protection, our flying companies do not organise intercontinental flights and because of that the exposure of crews to radiation is within limits. The limit concentrations for persons exposed to ionizing radiation at work are specified in the Rulebook on the Limits Over which the Population and Persons Working with Sources of Ionizing Radiations must not be Exposed to Radiation, on Measuring the Extent of Exposure to the Ionizing Radiations of the Persons that Work with the Sources of those Radiations and Testing the Contamination of the Working Environment (“Official Gazette of SFRY” Nos. 31/89, 63/89), see 22_Annex_11

As prescribed in Article 11 of this Rulebook, the annual effective dose in case of equal exposure of the whole tissue of persons working with ionizing sources is 50mSv. According to the provisions of this Rulebook, the persons working with ionizing radiation sources are divided in two categories, A and B, depending on the working conditions concerning those sources. Category A includes individuals for whom the annual exposure may exceed 3/10 of the effective dose limits, and category B includes individuals with low possibility of exceeding 3/10 of the effective dose limits. The radiation dose limits per individuals taking part in the elimination of accident consequences and emergency activities with ionizing radiation sources are prescribed by the provisions of this Rulebook. c)  Medical Application of Ionizing Radiation According to the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety, see 22_Annex_06, the application of ionizing radiation has to be justified, considering both benefits and risks, with respect to the alternative techniques available, and not including medical exposure. The Rulebook on the Conditions for Application  of Ionizing Radiation Sources in the Medicine (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 40/86, 10/87), see 22_Annex_13, is the by-law regulating the application of ionizing radiation in medicine, i.e. the protection of patients against ionizing radiation during medical exposure.  The doctor prescribing diagnostic or therapeutic procedure is obliged to estimate the medical justification for the application of ionizing radiation. Medical justification for the application of ionizing radiation for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes is estimated on the grounds of the type, stage and seriousness of the illness, patient’s age, sex, life and health risk assessment, envisaged benefits for the patient, as well as the possible adverse impact of the procedure on the patient and the rest of the population. This Rulebook specifies the conditions under which open radiation sources can be used in nuclear medicine, conditions for X-ray apparatus diagnostics, as well as the recommended activities for different doses of radiopharmaceutical preparations.  The methods of handling and maintaining ionizing chambers, technical prerequisite measures, procedures for and manner of obtaining certain performance, as well as the contents of the technical instructions for the ionizing chambers are regulated by the Rulebook for the Technical Norms for Ionizing Chamber Used in Radiotherapeutic Dosimetry (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 36/86), see 22_annex_14.  
d)  Emergency Preparedness and Information In compliance with Article 3 and Article 25 of the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety, see 22_Annex_06, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, at the proposal of the Directorate, is preparing the National Action Plan for protection of the population against harmful impacts of ionizing radiation in case of a radiation accident, which implements the provisions of Directive 89/618/Euroatom of 27 November 1989 on informing the general public about health protection measures to be applied and steps to be taken in the event of a radiological emergency.   Preparedness for emergency cases in the Republic of Macedonia is regulated by the Rulebook on the Places and Time Intervals for Systematic Testing of the Radionuclide Contents in Environment by Early Detection and Notification of Radioactive Contamination of the Environmental (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No.84/91), see 22_Annex_10Chapter B of this Rulebook specifies the conditions for and methods of examination when emergency is suspected and during the emergency, and of notification. If the level of the absorbed dose of the gamma radiation increases by 20-100 % above the specified upper limit, the authorized institution in the country declares itself to be in the state of emergency and is obliged to determine the causes of the occurrence, and then to notify the competent bodies. Republic of Macedonia is signatory to the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident of 1986, ratified by means of the Law on Ratification published in the “Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 15/89. The Convention was accepted on 20.09.1996 by means of succession, and entered into force on 17.11.1991. Republic of Macedonia is signatory to the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency of 1986, ratified by means of the Law on Ratification and published in the “Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 4/91). The Convention was accepted on 20.09.1996 by means of succession and entered into force on 17.11.1991. e)  Foodstuffs and Feedingstuffs Contamination  In the Republic of Macedonia, foodstuffs and feedingstuffs are regularly tested for radioactive contamination. According to the Law on Foodstuffs and Product and Maqterials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 54/02), see 22_Annex_15, foodstuffs containing radionuclides above the specified limit or irradiated above the level specified with the provisions are considered unsafe.  The Rulebook on the Places and Time Intervals for Systematic Testing of the Radionuclide Contents in Environment by Early Detection and Notification of Radioactive Contamination of the Environmental (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No.84/91), see 22_Annex_10, includes provisions on the examination of radionuclide concentration in drinking water, as well as methods of radionuclide concentration examination in foodstuffs and feedingstuffs. The radionuclide concentration is examined in different samples of foodstuffs. The sampling locations, sampling methods, number of samples of specific foodstuffs and sampling schedules are specified in the Annual programme for radionuclide concentration examination in foodstuffs with the aim of calculating the annual dose for the population. The radioactive contamination of feeding stuffs is regulated by the provisions of the Rulebook on Maximum Permissible Limits of Radionuclides Contained in Livestock Feed, in Raw Materials for Manufacturing Fodder Mixtures for Animal Feed and in the Water for Supplying Animals, as well as on the Conditions under which they can be put on Sale and Used for Animal feed if the Content of Radionuclides is Above the Defined Limits of Activity (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 16/92), see 22_Annex_16This Rulebook prescribes the maximum permissible levels of radionuclides of 137Cs and Sr in feedingstuffs, water for cattle, and the conditions under which they may be distributed for sale for animal nutrition. This Rulebook specifies that the maximum allowed radionuclide concentration in feedingstuffs made of ingredients for forage mixtures and in water for cattle is 5 Bq/kg for 137Cs and 1 Bq/kg for Sr. According to the Rulebook on Way of Conducting the Veterinary – Sanitary Examination and Check up of the Animals before Slaughtering and of the Products of Animal Origin (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 43/86), see 22_Annex_17, radionuclide concentration test is performed at the request of the importing country or in emergency. In the Republic of Macedonia, radionuclide concentration tests are regularly performed on deliveries of animal origin for export in compliance with the Council Regulation 737/90. f)  Radioactive Waste Shipments In the Republic of Macedonia transport of radioactive materials is performed in compliance with the provisions of the Law on Carriage of Dangerous Goods (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 27/90, 45/90 and “Official Gazette of RM” No 12/93), see 22_Annex_18. Permits for hazardous material transport are issued by the Ministry of Health, upon prior consent issued by the Ministry of Interior.  This Law specifies the conditions under which hazardous materials may be transported and the related activities (preparation of the materials to be transported, packaging, loading and unloading). Permits for hazardous materials, according to this Law, are classified in class 7. The Law also determines the conditions which must be fulfilled for issuing permit for transport of radioactive materials.  Republic of Macedonia is signatory to the 1957 European Agreement Concerning International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road, ratified by the Law on Ratification (“Official Gazette SFRY” No. 59/72). The Agreement was accepted by means of succession and entered into force on 17.11.1991. The Republic of Macedonia is signatory to the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, which was ratified by the Law on Ratification  (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 9/85), adopted on 20 September 1996 by means of succession, and entered into force on 17.11.1991. According to Article 68, line 6, of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia ratifies, by means of a law all international agreements of the Republic of Macedonia. By ratification, the international agreements are incorporated in the internal law and cannot be further changed with another law. Accordingly, the ratification incorporates the international agreements into the internal legal system of the Republic of Macedonia. Article 25 of the Law on Environment and Nature Protection and Promotion prohibits import of radioactive waste for release, storage, use and disposal in the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. g)  Management of High Activity Sealed Sources and Orphan Sources The ionizing radioactive sources that are in use in the Republic of Macedonia are of low and medium activity. In case a permit for high activity sources is requested, the procedure is in compliance with the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety, see 22_Annex_06If storage of such sources is necessary, the legal entity is obliged to reduce the volume and activity of any waste resulting from the operation of the source with a permit to the lowest possible level and to handle the waste in the manner prescribed by the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety and the derived regulations.  The Rulebook for the Way of Keeping Sources of the Ionising Radiation and Radiation of the Population and the Persons that are Exposed to the Effects of the Ionised Radiation During Work (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 40/86), see 22_Annex_19, requires legal entities to keep records of and measure the level of radiation exposure; to keep records of the people exposed to radiation at work; to keep records of the patients exposed to ionizing radiation; to examine radioactive materials in the vicinity of nuclear facilities and to systematically monitor the environment contamination with radioactive materials. In cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency, the Republic of Macedonia is currently implementing the project MAK/4/002 “Management and Disposal of Low and Intermediate Level Waste”. The aim of this project is to provide for the storage of spent sources of ionizing radiation in a central storage facility, especially constructed for this purpose and in compliance with the recommendations of the International Atomic Energy Agency and EU. Radioactive waste management is currently regulated by the Rulebook on the Manner of Collecting, Recording, Processing, Keeping, Final Storage and Release of Radioactive Waste in the Environment (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 40/86), see 22_Annex_20, which will remain in force until the new rulebook enters into force. The existing regulation does not include provisions for managing orphan sources. Such sources have not been reported or discovered in the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. 
3. What is the timetable for compliance with Euratom Treaty and derived legislation provisions on radiation protection? Please provide any draft amendments or draft new legislation under consideration for the future. 
The process of approximation of the Republic of Macedonia to the international standards for ionizing radiation protection began with the adoption of the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 48/02). It is of primary importance to found a Radiation Safety Directorate for the purpose of approximation of the by-laws on ionizing radiation protection to the provisions of the Euroatom Treaty. The establishment of this Directorate has been envisaged for 2005.  The by-laws are being prepared on the basis of the model -rulebooks of the International Atomic Energy Agency published in the Basic Safety Standards of 1994, the Council Directive 96/29/Euroatom, the stands on transboundary effects, and the provisions of international conventions.   Thanks to the technical support of the International Atomic Energy Agency, three rulebooks have been drafted so far: 1.  Draft Rulebook for Limitation of Exposure to Ionizing Radiation, Conditions for Exposure in Special Circumstances and Carrying out Interventions in Emergency Cases, see 22_Annex_212.  Draft Rulebook for the Conditions and Measures for Protection against Ionizing Radiation for Performing Works with Radioactive Sources, see 22_Annex_223.  Rulebook on Conditions and Measures for Protection against Ionizing Radiation in Operation of X-ray Apparatuses, Accelerators and other Devices arising from Ionizing Radiation, see 22_Annex_23In order to cover the whole field, the Law on Ionizing Radiation Protection and Safety foresees the drafting of rulebooks relating to the following fields:  Air, soil, drinking water, foodstuffs and feedingstuffs; -  Construction materials, items of general consumption, tobacco and processed tobacco products, drugs and additional medicines, cosmetic preparations and products for personal hygiene;   -  Rulebook on derived action levels in foodstuffs (both for children and adults) following a nuclear accident (Directive 3954/87/Euratom)  Rulebook on exemption levels and activities; Rulebook on clearance levels and activities; Rulebook on continuous exposure; and  -  Decree issued by the Government for the implementation of the National Emergency Plan, which will implement the provisions of Directive 89/618/Euratom on informing the general public about health protection measures to be applied and steps to be taken in the event of radiological emergency.  The by-laws, which will bring about harmonisation with the relevant EU directives, are to be adopted in 2007. Technical assistance of the International Atomic Energy Agency is expected in the preparation of the remaining documents. 
K. Climate change 

1. Is there a national climate change office or similar for developing climate change policy? What government agencies are involved in this process? Has any national action plan or any other policy document been adopted with respect to climate change? 
The Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning is the national focal point for climate change issues and the body responsible for policy making with regard to the implementation of the provisions of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (“Official Gazette of RM” No 61/97). In January 2000, the first project office was set up within the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, when the work on the First National Communication on Climate Change began with the financial support provided by the Global Environment Facility (GEF). The Office was established with the aim of strengthening the national capacities in the implementation of the obligations taken over with the ratification of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The Office is strengthening the system for development and periodical upgrading of national inventories of anthropogenic emissions, as well as the system for formulation, implementation, publishing and regular upgrading of the national programme containing the measures of climate change mitigation and adaptation.Before being delivered to the highest body of the Convention (Conference of Parties), the components of the National Communications are reviewed and approved by the National Climate Change Committee established on the basis of the Decision of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” Nos. 44/00, 79/03, 4/04) and composed of the representatives of governmental institutions, non-governmental organisations, private entities and a research department.  The following governmental institutions contribute to the work of the National Climate Change Committee: Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning (Vice President of the Committee) Ministry of Economy Ministry of Transport and Communications Ministry of Education and Science Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy Ministry of Finance Ministry of Health The National Committee is an advisory body in the policy making process of the Republic of Macedonia with respect to climate change issues. The Republic of Macedonia prepared the First National Communication on Climate Change, which was adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. It was submitted to the Secretariat of the Convention in March 2003 and presented to the highest body of the Convention at its ninth Conference (Milan, December 2003).   The First National Communication on Climate Change incorporates the Action Plan, which includes recommendations and measures for greenhouse gas (GHG) effects abatement, as well as measures for adoptation to future climate change in the most sensitive sectors. The plan lacks precise specification of the obligations as well as time framework and cost estimates for the implementation of the proposed activities. These shortcomings are expected to be eliminated in the Second National Communication on Climate Change, for which preparation a project proposal has been submitted to the Global Environment Facility. 
2. Is there a completed national inventory of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions for 1990 and for any later years? 
The First National Communication on Climate Change contains a national inventory of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and sinks for the following gases: CO, CH, NO, for the 1990-1998 period, with 1994 as a baseline year.  The inventory was developed in compliance with the methodology of the Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change (IPCC) for the non-Annex I Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  
Table: Greenhouse gas emissions in kt for each sector 
Sector 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995  1996 1997 1998 Energy 8.769,96 8.234,05 7.727,42 8.227,08  8.016,41 8.244,52 8.160,77 8.591,50 9.189,06 Industry 1.561,86 1.299,22 1.236,26 1.049,91 888,84 796,98 841,94 1.038,60  995,32 Agriculture 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 Forestry 83,64 6,48 136,31 209,41 84,22 1,52 14,24 51,32 27,44 Waste 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 

Total 10.415,46 9.539,75 9.099,99 9.486,40  8.989,47 9.043,02 9.016,95 9.681,42 10.211,82 Energy 84,67 78,75 76,74 78,73 82,96 85,64 81,89 86,68 93,98 Industry  0,01 0,01 0,01 0,01 0,01 0,01 0,00 0,00 0,00 Agriculture 38,14 37,36 38,03 38,16 38,07 37,45 35,99 35,17 33,17 Forestry 0,23 0,02 0,37 0,57 0,23 0,04 0,14 0,07 Waste 48,93 50,31 50,12 50,26 47,58 48,03 49,41 49,49 50,95 

Total 171,98 166,46 165,27 167,72 168,84 171,13 167,34 171,48 178,17 Energy 0,15 0,14 0,14 0,14 0,14 0,14 0,13 0,13 0,13 Industry 0,23 0,23 0,14 0,18 0,33 0,16 0,17 0,20 0,22 Agriculture 3,95 3,77 3,77 3,68 3,8 3,63 3,26 2,99 2,84 Forestry 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 0,00 Waste 0,46 0,47 0,47 0,47 0,44 0,45 0,45 0,46 0,46 


Total 4,79 4,61 4,52 4,47 4,71 4,38 4,01 3,78 3,65 Energy 10.595,51 9.932,20 9.381,81 9.925,08  9.801,81 10.085,98 9.921,41 10.451,24 11.203,71 Industry 1.632,34 1.371,42 1.281,22 1.104,53 991,55 847,84 894,82 1.101,52 1.063,63 Agriculture 2.025,44 1.953,26 1.967,33 1.942,16  1.977,47 1.911,75 1.766,39 1.665,47 1.576,97 Forestry 88,47 6,90 144,08 221,38 89,05 1,52 15,08 54,26 28,91 Waste 1.170,13 1.202,21 1.198,22 1.201,16  1.135,58 1.148,13 1.177,11 1.181,89 1.212,55 

-eq
Total 
15.511,89 14.465,99 13.972,66 14.394,31  13.995,46 13.995,22 13.774,81 14.454,38 15.085,77 Energy 68,31 68,66 67,14 68,95 70,04 72,07 72,03 72,31 74,27 Industry 10,52 9,48 9,17 7,67 7,08 6,06 6,50 7,62 7,05 Agriculture 13,06 13,50 14,08 13,49 14,13 13,66 12,82 11,52 10,45 Forestry 0,57 0,05 1,03 1,54 0,64 0,01 0,11 0,38 0,19 Waste 7,54 8,31 8,58 8,34 8,11 8,20 8,55 8,18 8,04 

-eq [%] Total 100,00 100,00 100,00 100,00 100,00 100,00 100,00 100,00 100,00 Source: Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, First National Communicationt of the Republic of Macedonia to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2003 
3. What are the expected GHG emissions until 2012 compared to 1990? 
According to the baseline scenario, in comparison to the greenhouse gas emissions in 1990 (15.511,80 kt CO-eq), the projected emissions will rise by 17 % in 2012 (18.136,00 kt CO-eq), and by 28 % in 2020 (19.851,00 kt CO-eq) , The values for 2012 emissions are based on the emission decrease study prepared as part of the First National Communication of the Republic of Macedonia under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. The study has been made for the following sectors: electricity production, heat production, transport, industry, waste, agriculture and forestry. The Vienna automatic system planning for the development of the electricity system until 2030 was used for the electricity production sector (comprising 50 % of the total emissions). The estimations of the projected emissions for other sectors have been made on the basis of experts’ opinions. 5,00010,00015,00020,00025,00020002005201020152020[kt]LUCFAgricultureWasteIndustryTransportHeatElectricityProjections of greenhouse gas emissions (expressed in CO-eq) for each sector until 2020. Source: Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, First National Communication on Climate Change under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, 2003. 4. Has your country submitted any national communication according to the United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change (UNFCCC)? If so, when was it submitted? 
The Republic of Macedonia has prepared the First National Communication on Climate Change, which was adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia on its 16 Session on 03.02.2003. The Communication was submitted to the Secretariat of the Convention on 25.03.2003. It was presented to the highest body of the Convention, the Conference of the Parties, on its ninth assembly held in Milan in December 2003. The Communication is available on the website of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (www.unfccc.int), as well as on the national website (www.unfccc.org.mk). 
5. At which stage is your country in ratifying the Kyoto Protocol? 
The Republic of Macedonia ratified the Kyoto Protocol in July 2004 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 49/04). 
6. Do any countries, UN organisations or other donors fund capacity building activities for the UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol in your country? 
Republic of Macedonia prepared its First National Communication on Climate Change with the financial support provided by the Global Environment Facility (GEF), implemented through the United Nations Development Programme. The Global Environment Facility submitted a draft project for preparation of the Second National Communication on Climate Change with the UNDP as the implementation agency. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia has also allocated funds for this project.  Republic of Macedonia participates in the regional project “Capacity building for improving the quality of the national GHG inventories” (Europe/ CIS region), financed by GEF and implemented by UNDP, 2003-2006. Republic of Macedonia has also expressed interest in participating in the project “Financing Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Investment for Climate Change Mitigation” which is planned for implementation in selected countries of South Eastern and Eastern Europe and the independent countries of the Commonwealth. The following UN agencies have been recommended: UN-ECE, Energy Efficiency 21 Project ESCAP, UNDP-GEF, resident UN-ECE coordinators coordinating relevant UNFCCC activities. The implementation of the Sustainable Energy Programme is underway in the Republic of Macedonia, which was made possible with the financial support from GEF through the World Bank as an implementation agency. The project contains two components: Design of Project Development Assistance Facility and Design of Sustainable Energy Financing Facility. Underway are initial negotiations with the UNDP Regional Office in Bratislava and the UNDP Office in Macedonia concerning implementation of activities for strengthening capacities for implementing a Clear Development Mechanism (CDM), applicable to countries like the Republic of Macedonia which do not belong to the Annex I group of countries as well as establishment of competent institutions to coordinate these activities.  Republic of Macedonia has already organised some activities with the aim of preparing recommendations for strategic regional programming of CARDS Assistance 2005-2006 in the Region of West Balkans, and towards the implementation of the liabilities imposed by environmental acquis, and in connection with the Kyoto Protocol and the regional energy market in South Eastern Europe.   The International Finance Corporation/ Southeast Europe Enterprise Development has also expressed interest for conducting activities in the region in connection with awareness raising and capacity strengthening for ratification/ implementation of the Kyoto Protocol, depending on the stage of the Protocol implementation the countries are at in the region where SEED have their offices. 