B. LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK 

1. Please describe the scope of your consumer protection policy. Indicate whether the following sectors are covered and to what extent they are in line with the relevant EC acquis: 

) Safety-related measures: 
i) general product safety (Directive 92/59/EEC and revised Directive 2001/95/EC) (see below) 
The general product safety Directive 92/59/EEC and revised Directive 2001/95/EC are partially implemented in the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, and the definitions of the terms “safe product” (Article 33) and “dangerous product” (Article 34) have been accepted, as well as the obligation for giving information on the products and putting into circulation of safe products (Article 35). The Directive 92/59/EEU and revised Directive 2001/95/EU will be fully transposed into the Law on General Product Safety, which is in preparation, and its passing is expected in 2005. ii) liability for defective products (Directive 85/374/EEC) (1) Do you have legislation concerning liability for defective products? (2) Are there legal provisions in force establishing the principle of objective liability or liability without fault of the producer in cases of damage caused by a defective product? If such provisions are in force, is there a rule of joint liability in cases where more than one person is liable for the same damage? (3) If legal provisions on product liability are in force, what products do they cover? Are some products excluded from the scope of these rules? What is the definition of "damage"? (4) If legal provisions on product liability are in force, how is the producer defined, what are the rules applicable to burden of proof? (5) If legal provisions on product liability are in force, are there any rules exempting the producer from liability (e.g. producer did not put the product into circulation, the defect causing the damage came into being after the product was put into circulation by the producer, the product was not manufactured for profit making sale, the product was neither manufactured nor distributed in the course of producer's business, the state of scientific and technical knowledge at the time when the product was put into circulation was not such as to enable the defect to be discovered, the defect is due to compliance of the product with mandatory regulations issued by the public authorities)? (6) If legal provisions on product liability are in force, is the producer's liability altered when the damage is caused both by a defect in the product and by an act or omission of a third party? (7) If legal provisions on product liability are in force, are there any rules on expiration of liability? (8) Do you have any plans to modify the existing legislation? Please give details and timetables. 

(1)  Yes, under the Law on Obligations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/01, 4/02 and 5/03) and the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01Article 165, paragraph 1 of the Law on Obligations stipulates that a party trading goods of its own production, which due to flaws of which the party was not aware, presents danger of damage to persons or objects, shall be liable for any eventual damage caused by that defect. According to paragraph 2 of this Article, the producer shall be also liable for any dangerous features of the product after failing to take all measures necessary to prevent the damage they have been able to foresee by means of warning, safety packing or other appropriate measure. The Consumer Protection Law regulates the liability of the producer and the distributor for putting defective products into circulation.  Article 41 of the Consumer Protection Law stipulates that the producer, i.e. the distributor, is liable for the damage that has been caused by the defects of their product.  This subject matter is harmonised and regulated in compliance with the Directive 85/374/EEC. (2)   The liability of the producer for the damage caused by defective products (Article 165 of the Law on Obligations, “Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/01, 4/02 and 5/03) is an objective liability, which means that the guilt of the producer for the damage caused is not relevant for the existence of their liability, but the liability is based on the fact that a defective product has been put into circulation, and it has caused damage. The provision of Article 41 of the Consumer Protection Law also refers to this matter, determining joint liability of the producer and the person that within its business activities on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia imported a product for sale, hire, lease, or some other kind of distribution. The distributor, or the trader, of the product that caused the damage will be regarded as producer, according to paragraph 3 of this Article, if the producer of the product produced on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia cannot be identified, unless the distributor, or the trader, have informed the injured party about the identity of the producer in a reasonable period, or when the importer of the product imported from abroad could not have been identified even though the name of the producer is given on the product itself, unless the distributor, or the trader, have informed the injured party about the identity of the producer in a reasonable period.  The provision of paragraph 4 of Article 41 of the Consumer Protection Law is more precise in relation to objective liability, since it determines the following: if it cannot be determined who the producer or the importer of the product is, then any trader or distributor shall be considered a producer and shall be liable for the damage caused by the defects of the product; and the provision of paragraph 5 of this Article determines that the trader shall be liable to the consumer for any defect related to the conformity, which existed at the time when the products were delivered. At the same time, it is pointed out that the liability of the producer for the dangerous features  of the product (Article 165, paragraph 2 of the Law on Obligations) is also causal because it is sufficient that the defective product has been put into circulation without an appropriate indication about the danger and the need for taking other measures for eliminating the harmful effects during the usage of the product, so the producer is liable if the damage has occurred irrespective of the guilt or innocence for the defect in question. Although this Article determines the joint liability of several producers for the damage caused by a defective product, these cases are covered by the provisions of Articles 195 to 197 of the Law on Obligations for joint liability for the occurred damage. (3)  The provisions of the Consumer Protection Law (Article 41), as well as the Law on Obligations (Article 165), related to  damage caused by a defective product are not limited to specific types of products, and they consider all products put into circulation.  Article 142 of the Law on Obligations defines “damage” as reduction of one's property (ordinary damage) preventing accrual thereof (loss of earnings), and inflicting of physical or mental distress or fear (non-material damage). This is also covered by the provisions on compensation of material damage included in the Law on Obligations, Articles 174 to 177, the provisions on the scope of compensation for material damage of  Articles 178 to 181; more specifically on the compensation for material  damage in case of death, bodily or health injury regulated by Articles 182 to 186, and specifically on compensation of material damage in cases of offences to honour and spreading untrue allegations regulated by Article 187, while the compensation for non-material damage is regulated by Articles 188 to 194. (4) According to the Consumer Protection Law (Article 4), “producer” is any person that makes final products or components for making basic products; or persons that, through their business name and their designation of the product present themselves as producers. The importer of the product is also considered a producer.  The Consumer Protection Law determines specifically what is considered a safe product in Article 33, and dangerous products are specifically defined in Article 34; they serve as legal provisions for proving defectiveness of products. In this context, Article 42 of the same Law provides that a person should prove that a product is unsafe by means of presenting the product and the time it was put into circulation; and that the product does not meet the general obligation of conformity laid down in Article 22 of this Law or the contractual obligations.  The competent inspection bodies identify the factual situation inspecting the scene, or examining the product with laboratory or forensic analyses. According to Article 41 of the Consumer Protection Law, the producer is liable for the damage caused by the defects of their product, which means that the producer is liable for the damage provided that the product is put into circulation, and article 47 of the Law prohibits the sale of products with expired period of use. (5) According to Article 52, paragraph 1 of the Consumer Protection Law, the producer shall not be liable for the defects of the product if it is proven that:   They did not put the product into circulation;   Taking into account the circumstances of the case, it is probable that the defect which caused the damage did not exist at the time when they  put the product into circulation, or that such defect came into being afterwards;   They did not produce the product for sale or for any form of distribution for economic purposes, neither did they produce nor distribute the product in the course of their business venture or their regular operation.   The defect is due to compliance of the product with mandatory regulations adopted by competent state bodies;   They made only the component part of the product, or they supplied only the raw materials, supporting materials or additives, so the defect occurred due to the composition of the product in which the component part was incorporated, and the damage resulted from violation of the instructions given by the producer of that product. Article 52, paragraph 2 determines that a product is not considered defective solely because a better product has been subsequently placed on the market. (6) According to Article 52, paragraph 3 of the Consumer Protection Law, the liability of the producer may be limited or excluded when, having taken into account all the circumstances, the damage is caused both by the defect and by the fault of the injured party or any other person for whom the injured party is liable. This means that the producer is partially excluded from liability if the damage is caused by fault of the injured or a third party. (7) Article 52, paragraph 5 of the Consumer Protection Law determines that the grounds for producer’s liability shall be limited to a period of 10 years from the date on which the producer put the product that caused the damage into circulation, unless the injured party has in the meantime initiated procedure against the producer. (8) There are plans for adoption a separate Law on General Product Safety in 2005, which will regulate the issues covered by Directive 92/59/EEC, revised by Directive 2001/95/EC. 
b) Non-safety related measures (protection of economic interests of consumers): 
i) misleading advertising (Directive 84/450/EEC) 
Directive 84/450/C, related to misleading advertising, is fully implemented in the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01. The provisions of this Law (Articles 26 and 27), other than the prohibition of misleading advertising, also prohibit advertising that discredits human dignity, and causes or might cause physical, mental or other damage to children, that to children spread massages or parts of messages that take advantage or misuse or likely to misuse their impetuous nature and lack of experience. At the same time, the Law also regulates cases in which comparative advertising is permitted (Article 29), as well as the requests for termination or prohibition of non-permitted advertising (Articles 29 and 30).  Article 136 of the Consumer Protection Law determines that: A legal entity shall be fined for an infraction with the amount of 100.000 to 300.000 MKD if it acts contrary to the provisions laid down in Article 27, paragraphs 1 and 3 of this Law, and Article 29 of this Law, and in addition to the fine, the legal entity shall be imposed a safety measure - prohibition of performing the activity for a period of two to four years. Apart from the legal entity, the responsible person of the legal entity shall be fined for the infraction with an amount of 20.000 to 50.000 MKD, and it shall be imposed a safety measure – prohibition of performing responsible duty for a period of three months to one year. In case the legal entity does not act in accordance with Article 29 of the Consumer Protection Law, a safety measure - confiscation or temporarily confiscated of products - shall be imposed.  The Broadcasting Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 20/97 and 70/03), in its Article 49 states that advertisements should be real and honest, not manipulating the general audience and not adverse to the interests of consumers or users of services.  (for more details see the answer under c point i) The Law on Obligations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/01, 4/02, and 5/03), in its Article 187 determines that a person that has offended the honour of another person or has made untrue statements of the past, knowledge and capability or of something else related to another person, while they have been or have had to be aware that the statements were not true, and has caused physical damage to that person, is obliged to reimburse that person for the damage. 
ii) contracts negotiated away from business premises (Directive 85/577/EEC) 
Directive 85/577/C is fully implemented in the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, with the provisions of Articles 105 to 107, which determine which contracts are considered concluded away from business premises, and they also determine the contracts to which these provisions shall not apply. There are also provisions on the obligation for notification on termination of a contract, which determine that in case of conclusion of a contract between a trader and a consumer away from the business premises of the trader, the trader is obliged to notify the customer in writing about his/her right to unilaterally terminate the contract with a simple statement within a period not shorter than 7 days from the day when the contract was concluded. The trader is obliged to notify the consumer in writing about the address on which they can send the notice on termination of the contract. According to Article 138 of the Consumer Protection Law, the legal entity shall be fined for infraction with the amount from 80.000 to 240.000 MKD if it concluded a contract according to Article 105, paragraph 1, line 1 and 2 of this Law without legitimising with an identification card (Article 105, paragraph 3). In addition to the fine, the legal entity shall also be imposed a safety measure – prohibition of performing activity for a period from two to four years. The responsible person of the legal entity shall be fined for the infraction with an amount of 20.000 to 50.000 MKD, and it shall be imposed a safety measure – prohibition of performing responsible duty for a period of three months to one year. 
iii) consumer credit (Directive 87/102/EEC as amended by Directives 90/88/EEC and 98/7/EC) 
The full transposition of Directive 87/102/C as amended by Directives 90/88/C and 98/7/C in the national legislation will be finished by the end of 2006. At the moment, part of the issues treated by Directive 87/102/C as amended by Directives 90/88/C and 98/7/C are regulated with the Law on Obligations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/01, 4/02 and 5/03) through:   Article 12, which determines that in the process of establishing the obligation relations and implementing the rights and obligations resulting from such obligations, the entities are obliged (if when performing their business activities they are directly providing services to citizens) to define and perform their rights and obligations in such a manner, so that they are in compliance with the basic consumer rights defined by the Law on Obligations, by other laws, and by international agreements ratified by the Republic of Macedonia.    Article 23, which defines the place and time of entering into contract.    Articles 132 to 134 which regulate the assignment of contracts to third parties, and the rights pertaining to the user (in this case the consumers) from the assignee.     Chapter XXXIX (Articles 1104 to 1107), which regulates the forms of contract of credit, its contents (amount, terms for awarding, using and returning the credit), and the conditions for termination of the contract and returning the credit ahead of time. 
iv) package travel, package holidays and package tours (Directive 90/314/EEC) 
Directive 90/314/EEC is fully implemented in the Law on Tourism (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 62/04) with the provisions of Articles 2, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22, and 23 which specifically determine the liability of travel agents when organising travel packages. At the same time, this Law stipulates liability and obligation on the part of the travel agency to conclude a contract with the user of the travel package, as well as an obligation to actually perform the travel package, and an obligation for the organiser of the travel to conclude an insurance policy with an appropriate insurance institution. The contracts for organised travel are regulated by the Law on Obligations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/01, 4/02 and 5/03), Articles 915 to 935, and with the Mediatory Contract for Travelling, Articles 936-940 of the same Law. 
v) unfair terms in consumer contracts (Directive 93/13/EEC) 
Directive 93/13/C is fully implemented in the provisions of Articles 53 to 83 of the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01. Article 53 defines the term “unfair contractual provisions”, and then the specific cases of provisions that are considered unfair are mentioned in the following articles, finishing with the provisions stipulating that the ambiguous or incomprehensible contractual provisions shall be interpreted in favour of the consumer, and that the unfair contractual provisions shall be considered null and void.According to Article 137 of the Consumer Protection Law, the legal entity shall be fined for infraction with the amount from 80.000 to 250.000 MKD if it imposes contractual provisions which are stated as unfair in Articles 54 -77 and 79 of this Law. In addition to the fine, the legal entity shall also be imposed a safety measure – prohibition of performing activity for a period from one to three years. The  responsible person  of the legal entity shall be fined for the infraction with an amount of 20.000 to 50.000 MKD, and it shall be imposed a safety measure – prohibition of performing responsible duty for a period of three months to one year. 
vi) purchase of the right to use immovable properties on a timeshare basis (Directive 94/47/EC) 
Directive 94/47/C is fully implemented through the provisions of Articles 108 to 120 of the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, which regulate the way of concluding the relevant contracts, the contents of the preliminary contract, as well as the contract, the possibility of registering the right to use immovable property in the public register, etc. According to Article 138 of the Consumer Protection Law, a legal entity shall be fined for infraction with the amount from 80.000 to 240.000 MKD if it does not deliver the written notice in terms of Article 110 paragraphs 1 and 3 of the Law; if the content of the contracts do not include the provisions laid down in Article 111 of the Law; if it does not inform the consumer about modifications of any data stated in the prior notification (Article 112 paragraph 3); if, when calculating  public services, does not act in accordance with Article 118 paragraph 2; if it does not provide for all consumers to connect and use of the utilities and public services network under non-discriminatory and in advance known and accepted conditions (Article 119 of the Law); if it does not maintain the standards and quality of services determined in a law or a regulation (Article 120 of this Law). In addition to the fine, the legal entity shall also be imposed a safety measure – prohibition of performing activity for a period from two to four years. The responsible person in the legal entity, if it does not comply with the aforementioned provisions, will be fined for the misdemeanour with an amount from 20.000 to 50.000 MKD. 
vii) distance contracts (Directive 97/7/EC) 
Directive 93/7/C is fully implemented through the provisions of Articles 84 to 104 of the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01. The provisions of these Articles define the term "contracts concluded at distance" and "means of distant communication”, to which these provisions apply, as well as the prohibition on conclusion of particular contracts by those means. The rights, periods, ways and consequences of contract termination, as well as the burden of proof, are also regulated. 
viii) comparative advertising (Directive 97/55/EC amending Directive 84/450/EEC) 
Directive 97/55/C amending Directive 84/450/C relating to comparative advertising is fully implemented in the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, through the provisions of Article 24 paragraph 3, which determines what is considered comparative advertising, and Article 29, which determines the conditions under which comparative advertising is not permitted. 
ix) indication of the prices of products offered to consumers (Directive 98/6/EC) 
Directive 98/6/C is fully implemented through the provisions of Article 8 of the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, where it is determined what is considered a retail price and its contents, the way of indication of the prices and the obligation for the traders to abide by the indicated retail prices. Also, the provisions of Article 10 paragraph 3 stipulate that in cases when products are wrapped in special paper or additional decorations, the price of those products and the wrapping service shall be indicated clearly and on a visible place. 
x) injunctions for the protection of consumers' interests (Directive 98/27/EC) 
The Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, authorises the State Market Inspectors to impose administrative measures (Articles 130 – 135), while Article 134 authorises them to decide on temporary confiscation of products, apart from imposing administrative measures for certain activities. At the same time, if there has been a violation, the state market inspectors have the obligation to request filing of misdemeanour charges for the activities stated in the penalty provisions of Articles 136 – 139.  However, the Law on Executive Procedure (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 53/97, 59/00 and 64/03) determines that the Courts impose provisional measures according to the provisions of Articles 263-275 of this Law. This Law also determines the possibility of temporary securing of monetary and non-monetary claims provided that the creditor proves there is a risk of obstructing or aggravating the accomplishment of the creditor’s claim if the proposed measure is not accepted.  The new Law on Execution and Securing, which is in parliamentary procedure (the former Law on Executive Procedure), will provide for an essential change of the enforcement procedure - it will be implemented out of Court. In relation to the determination and the implementation of provisional measures for the purpose of securing monetary claims, any measure for achieving such a goal is permitted, and especially the following measures:   Imposing a ban on the debtor to utilize movable objects, as well as to keep such objects;   Imposing a ban on the debtor for alienation or encumbrance of his/her immovable property or related rights on immovable property registered in his/her name, with a notification of such a ban in a public register; or leasing them to a third party;    Imposing a ban on the debtor to sell bonds or shares;   Imposing a ban on a debtor’s debtor to pay them off an active debt, or to pass on objects; as well as a ban on the debtor to receive objects, to charge claims and to have them at their disposal; and   To issue an injunction to the bearer of payment operations of the debtor or of a third party, upon a debtor’s order, to allow payments from debtors’ accounts in the amount of the sum a provisional measure was allowed for. Provisional measures do not provide the right to lien. (Article 286) If the creditor has made the claim probable, and if there is danger that the accomplishment of the claim could be obstructed or aggravated, the conditions for allowance of provisional measures for securing non-litigation claims are met. Provisional measures could also be allowed if the creditor proves that the measure is necessary for prevention of use of force, or of establishment of a non-compensational damage. (Article 287) The provisions of Article 285 paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Law are also implemented in relation to the provisional measures for securing non-monetary claims. Any measure for achieving security of non-monetary claims is permitted, especially the following measures:   Imposing a ban on alienation or encumbrance of movable objects to which the claim refers, as well as on keeping those objects;   Imposing a ban on alienation or encumbrance of immovable property to which the claim refers, with a notification on the ban in a public register;   Imposing a ban on the debtor to take actions that could damage the creditor, as well as a ban on making changes to the objects to which the claim refers.   Imposing a ban on debtor’s debtor to deliver the objects to which the claim refers; and   Paying off contributions for salary for workers during a dispute on the unlawfulness of a decision for termination of employment, if it is necessary for their support and the support of the persons that they are legally bound to support (Article 288). 
xi) certain aspects of the sale of consumer goods and associated guarantees (Directive 1999/44/EC) Directive 99/44/C is fully implemented through certain provisions of the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01. Article 21 determines the obligation of the trader, during the sale of products, to give and point out to the consumer the prescribed documents and the documents prepared by the producer for the purpose of easier and safe use of the product, i.e. declaration, warranty, technical manual, manual for assemblage, instructions for use, list of authorised services etc. Article 22 determines the obligation of the producer to ensure and to abide to the obligations from the warranty, the contents of the warranty, and that the documents should be written clearly and legibly, in Macedonian language and its Cyrillic alphabet, which does not exclude the possibility for additional use of other languages and signs easily understandable to the consumer. The provisions of Article 45 determine the conditions for exercising the consumer’s rights, as well as the obligations of the trader or the producer to meet the consumer's requests, while the provisions of Article 46 refer to placing requests for eliminating defects of products discovered during the warranty period, or within the period for safe use of the product, determined by the producer. Article 48 determines that the defects discovered by the consumer should be eliminated by the trader within 20 days from the moment of submission of the request by the consumer or after receiving the decision of the competent supervisory body ordering the trader to eliminate the defects in a specified period. In case of requests for replacement of products with warranty periods, the warranty for the new product shall be running from the day when the product replacing the defective product was delivered to the consumer. 
xii) distance marketing of consumer financial services (Directive 2002/65/EC amending Directives 90/619/EEC, 97/7/EC and 98/27/EC) 
Directive 2002/65/EC amending Directives 90/619/EEC, 97/7/EC and 98/27/EC has not been transposed in the national legislation.  The transposition of the above Directives will be finalised by the end of 2007, while the practical application of distance marketing of financial services will be implemented successively, according to the dynamics of liberalisation of capital transfers stipulated by the Law on Foreign Exchange Operations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 34/01, 49/01, 103/01, 54/02) and according to the degree of liberalisation of the market of certain financial services. 
xiii) codes of practice for the protection of consumers in respect of contracts negotiated at a distance (distance selling) (Commission Recommendation 92/295/EEC) 
The codes of practice for the protection of consumers in respect of contracts concluded at a distance are implemented in the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, on the basis of Directive 97/7/C. The Commission Recommendation 92/295/has not been implemented specifically.
xiv) principles applicable to the bodies responsible for out-of-court settlement of consumer disputes (Commission Recommendation 98/257/EC) 
In comparison with the European standards and practice in the European countries, there has been no developed system for alternative dispute resolution.  There is a plan for adoption a Law on Mediation, which will introduce the institute of mediation and the out-of-court dispute resolution, regulating cases and different forms of mediation and reconciliation and arbitrary dispute resolution, as well as the legal consequences of the acts and decisions brought during such out-of-court proceedings. A programme for selection and education of mediators will be prepared after the adoption of the Law on Mediation, and the procedures for conducting exams for mediators and the Ethical Code for Mediators will be prepared, too. This Law is expected to be adopted in 3 years time.
xv) principles for out-of-court bodies involved in the consensual resolution of consumer disputes (Commission Recommendation 2001/310/EC) 
The answer of this question is contained in the answer to the previous one. xvi) pre-contractual information to be given to consumers by lenders offering home loans (Commission Recommendation 2001/193/EC) 
The Commission Recommendation 2001/193/C has not been transposed in the national legislation. This is expected to be accomplished by the end of the year 2006.  
c) Other areas 

i) television broadcasting activities (Directive 89/552/EEC amended by Directive 97/36/EC) 
The Broadcasting Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 20/97, 70/03), see 20_Annex_01, regulates the rights relating to the protection of the interests of consumers as television audience in several segments, and specifically regarding:    Introduction of appropriate standards and rules on advertising and sponsorship;   Rules on the protection of the physical, mental and moral development of juveniles; Advertising is regulated by the provisions of Articles 48 to 57 of this Law. These provisions determine the principles of advertising, the duration of advertisements and teleshopping, the ways of inserting the advertisements in the broadcast, the prohibition for advertising certain products (drugs, tobacco, alcohol, and prescription medicine). There is a special provision regulating that advertisements should not manipulate the general audience and should be not adverse to the interests of consumers, or users of services, intended for protection of the consumers and the users of services.There is also a provision stipulating that advertisements for children, or advertisements in which children participate, must not contain messages that could damage their interests or have negative influence on children’s sensitivity and age.  The broadcasting of teleshopping is restricted to one hour per daily programme, and it refers only to the commercial broadcasting enterprises. Public broadcasting enterprises cannot provide such services (Article 51, paragraphs 3 and 4).  Sponsorship is regulated by the provisions of Articles 58 to 61. They stipulate that the sponsor must be clearly identified, that they cannot influence the contents of the sponsored programmes, and that the sponsored programmes should not encourage sales, purchase or lease of sponsor’s products. News and other informative programmes, as well as programmes of political or religious nature cannot be sponsored.  The protection of juveniles is regulated by Article 35 of the Law, which stipulates that programmes must not include indecent features, especially pornography and violence, neither programs which might have a negative impact on physical, spiritual or moral growth of children and youth. Films and other programmes that might have such an impact can be broadcast only between 24:00 and 06:00 hours.   With regard to the ratification of the Cross-border TV Convention by the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia, there have been reserve in relation to Article 15, paragraph 2 of the Convention, and the Republic of Macedonia has retained the right to restrict the retransmission of television programmes on its territory if they contain advertisements for alcoholic beverages, since the existing Broadcasting Law prohibits all advertising of alcoholic beverages. The implementation of Directive 89/552/C amended by Directive 97/36/C is explained in details in the answer to question B. - Legal framework, c) - other areas, section 2.  A detailed explanation of the provisions of the Broadcasting Law  is given in Chapter 20 – Culture and Audiovisual Policy, in the answer to question I. Audiovisual Policy, section 1, (for more details see 20_I_ _ _ 1). 
ii) electronic commerce (Directive 2000/31/EC)  
The Trade Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 16/04) provides for the wholesale and retail commerce through means of communication. Article 64, paragraph 4 of the Law on Obligations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/01, 4/02 and 5/03) allows for contracts to be concluded in writing, or through teleprinter, fax, computer, or any other means which allows for the content and the giver of the statement to be correctly determined. Articles 84–104 of the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, provide for contracts concluded using one or more means of distant communication (a telephone with or without human intervention, radio, videophone, videotext, fax, television, electronic mail, etc.)  There is no legislation on electronic commerce in the Republic of Macedonia and the Directive 2000/31/C has not been transposed in the national legislation. 
iii) medicinal products for human use (Directive 2001/83/EC) 
The area of drugs and medicinal products for human use is regulated by the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 21/98). The following secondary legislation has been passed on the basis of this Law:   Rulebook on Conditions Relating to Facilities, Equipment and Staff that are Mandatory for Legal Entities Registered for Wholesale of Drugs, Additional Medical Products, and Medical Devices which are Use in Human Medicine (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 64/02);   Rulebook on the Manner of Prescription and Selling Medicine and Medical Devices on Prescription(“Official Gazette of RM” No. 17/02);   Rulebook on Organising and Monitoring the Manner of Reporting and Data Relating to the Confirmed Undesirable Side Effects of Medicinal Products Use (“Official Gazette of SFRJ” No. 57/87);   Rulebook on Clinical Drug Testing (“Official Gazette of SFRJ” No. 2/89);   Instructions on Methods of Laboratory Testing of Drugs Before Putting into Circulation (“Official Gazette of SFRJ” No. 34/89);   Ordinance on Drugs Subject to Special Inspection before Putting into Circulation (“Official Gazette of SFRJ” No. 22/88);   Decision on Drug Classification (“Official Gazette of SFRJ” No. 47/85, 73/85 and  “Official Gazette of SRM” No. 54/90);   Instruction for Conducting the Procedure for Issuing Approval for Putting into Circulation of Final Drugs (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 49/04);   Instruction on Research of the Biological Availability and Bioequivalence of Medications.  (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 68/04); The implementation of Directive 2001/83/C is explained in more details in the answer of question B. - Legal framework, c) - other areas, section 2.  2. Please indicate for each of the above listed pieces of legislation the basic features of the respective legislation, including enforcement mechanisms, and plans for reform. For implementing regulations, please specify which regulations have already been adopted and give an indicative timetable for those that still need to be adopted. 
The answer to question B, 1, i, provides definitions for the terms safe product, dangerous product, as well as the obligation for providing information given by the trader concerning the product and putting safe products into circulation, pursuant to Directive 92/59/EEC and revised Directive 2001/95/EEC on General Product Safety, and in particular Article 8 thereof, whereas new Law on General Product Safety is foreseen to be enacted in the course of 2005. The existing Broadcasting Law (“Official Gazette of the RM” No 20/97, 70/03) implements significant part of the provisions of the Directive “Television Without Frontiers”. The Ministry of Transport and Communications is currently preparing the new Broadcasting Law which will completely implement the Directive 89/552/EEC amended by Directive 97/36/EC. Namely, new provisions are introduced in the part relating to television programmes which regulate TV advertising, sponsorship and teleshopping, protection of the interests of consumers, protection of juveniles from harmful content etc. Besides the existing restrictions as regards the forms of television advertising for narcotics, cigarettes and other tobacco products, as well as for medicinal products and medicinal treatment available only by prescription, the new Law will prohibit television advertising for weapons and companies that sell weapons, as well as for telephone services with pornographic content with special tariffs (in the period from 06:00 to 24:00). Taking into account that advertising for alcoholic beverages is being liberalised, the new Law stipulates new rules concerning the advertising for alcohol, completely harmonized with the Directive “Television Without Frontiers”. As regards the advertising for medicinal products and medicinal treatment available without prescription, new principles are introduced according to which this advertising will be clearly recognisable, true, subject to inspection and shall protect individuals from adverse effects on their health. The new Broadcasting Law is expected to be enacted in 2005. The Law onDrugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices (“Official Gazette of the RM” No 21/98) regulates the conditions relating to putting into circulation, production and trade, inspection of quality, safety and efficiency, as well as supervision over production, putting into circulation, trade and quality of drugs, Additional medical products and medical devices, as activities of public interest. The drugs, additional medical products and medical devices are placed on the market after obtaining relevant approval issued by duly authorised body of the Administration upon a proposal from the Committee on Drugs, Committee on Additional Medical Products and Committee on Medical Devices. The members of these Committees are appointed by the Minister of Health and Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management, from among the distinguished medical, dental, pharmaceutical, veterinary and other experts and scientists.  This Law regulates the conditions and methods of issuing approvals for production of drugs, as well as placing them on the market. The Law prohibits drugs, additional medical products or medical devices placing on the market, if harmful for people, animals and environment. At the same time, it is prohibited to place on the market a drug or medical device that contains or represents a genetically modified organism  such as live vaccines, viruses, modified body cells for therapeutic use for genetic diseases, gene carriers and other such products, unless they have been duly examined during test and development phases as regards their adverse impact on eco-systems.  In addition to the above, the Law regulates the conditions for terminating the approval for placing drugs, additional medical products and medical devices on the market before approval validity has expired. This part, besides of the request for placing products on market, also regulates the following issues: procedure for issuing approvals for placing on markets; approval for placing on market; holder of approval for placing on market; packaging and labelling; quality, safety and efficiency testing, clinical testing; approval for placing the first produced series of drugs which are subject to special control, as well as for each series of imported drugs, additional drugs and medical accessories; monitoring the safety and efficiency after placing products on market and informing and advertising for drugs and methods of drug prescription. The conditions for production, wholesale and retail sale, pricing methods, supervision and penalties are regulated with special chapter of the Law. Special chapters of the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices regulate the conditions concerning the space, equipment and personnel, as well as obtaining licences for production, wholesale (distribution) and retail sale (pharmacies), pursuant to the principles of Good Production Practice, Good Laboratory Practice, Good Distribution Practice and Good Pharmaceutical Practice. Furthermore, the issue of pricing is covered by special Chapter of the Law, as well as the methods of pricing relating to drugs, which is in connection with the List of Essential Drugs. Future plans:   The Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices  is foreseen to be amended during 2005, pursuant to Directive 2001/83;   Articles 87-99 of the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices, are foreseen to be amended pursuant to Directives 1991/356; 2003/95; 78/25; 81/464 and Regulation 803/2003;   Articles 77-79 of the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices, are foreseen to be amended pursuant to Regulation 95/504;   Articles 115-117 of the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices, are foreseen to be amended pursuant to Directive 89/105;   Taking the Directive 2002/98 into consideration, secondary legislation relating to proprietary medicinal products derived from human blood and human plasma is foreseen to be enacted;   Taking the Directive 1998/079 into consideration, secondary legislation or amendments to Articles of the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices are foreseen to be enacted; The secondary legislation deriving from the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices, shall be enacted within a period of one (1) year as of the date of entering into force of the amendments to this Law. A Rulebook on Data for Drug Manuals is to be adopted pursuant to Directive 2001/83. Part B – Legal Framework, item b), points iii, xii, xiv, xv, xvi stipulate the terms for harmonization with Directives and Commission Recommendations, (fore more details see 23_B_ _ _1) . 

3. Specify which authorities are competent for drafting the relevant legislation and how legislation is passed (primarily through parliamentary procedure or ministerial orders or decrees). 
The ways and procedures for adoption of laws are regulated by the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, while the work of the Assembly of Republic of Macedonia in this domain is regulated by the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly of Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 60/02).  The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, inter alia, stipulates that: “The right to propose adoption of a law is given to every Representative of the Assembly, to the Government of the Republic and to a group of at least 10,000 voters. The initiative for adopting a law may be granted to the authorised instances by any citizen, group of citizens, institutions or associations.”  Pursuant to Article 106 of the Rules of Procedure of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, the Government, in cases where it appears as an authorised instance, submits to the Assembly proposals for adoption of law, draft law, proposal of law and other regulation that is adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, in a form and according to the procedures determined by the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia.  The legislation in the Republic of Macedonia is generally adopted in a regular procedure of two readings, namely a Proposal to Adopt a Law and Draft Law. Bu exception, the Assembly may decide a law to be also examined as a Preliminary Draft-Law. In addition to the standard procedure, there is also a shortened or an urgent procedure for adopting legislation, which is also provided for by the Rules of Procedures of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. The Assembly of Republic of Macedonia, during the consideration of the Proposal to Adopt a Law, may decide that the drafter should submit a Preliminary Draft-Law, instead of a Draft Law.  The drafter of the law, pursuant to the Rules of Procedure of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, may submit to the Assembly a Proposal to Adopt a Law with a Draft Law, if the law in question is not complicated and voluminous. Also, according to the Rules of Procedures of the Assembly of Republic of Macedonia, there is a possibility for adopting legislation by an urgent procedure. In principle, all legislation is discussed by the relevant Commissions of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia and the Legislative and Legal Commission of the Assembly. During the discussions on certain Draft Law which are of public interest, the Assembly may decide to conduct a public discussion about the Draft Law. The Draft Law which is put to public discussion is published in the daily press determined by the Assembly, with a call for submitting opinions and suggestions within a certain period, on the basis of which the drafter of the Law submits a Draft Law. The Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia adopts legislation by a majority vote of the Representatives attending, but no less than one-third of the total number of Representatives, unless, by the Constitution, qualified majority is requested.  For laws directly concerning culture, usage of languages, education, personal documents and the usage of symbols, the Assembly decides with a majority vote of the Representatives attending, including a majority vote of the Representatives of the non-majority communities in the Republic of Macedonia attending. The procedure for amending the laws is carried out by submitting amendments, with a procedure provided by the Rules of Procedures of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. The laws proposed by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia or the authorised instances are adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia.  When the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia asks the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for an opinion on a Proposal to Adopt a Law, Draft Law or other regulation that has not been proposed by the Government itself, the Government forms an opinion before the consideration of the  proposed legislation in the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. The Government submits its opinion within 15 days from the day of receipt of the proposal, and by exception it may authorise a representative to deliver the Government opinion on an Assembly session.  All legislation in the Republic of Macedonia is adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia, through a parliamentary procedure. 
