SURVEILLANCE 

1. Please comment on the important aspects of the infrastructure for general product safety as described below by referring to your national system for market surveillance: a) market surveillance/enforcement authorities with defined responsibilities and sufficient powers and resources to monitor the compliance of products with the directive and to react to complaints; b) rapid and well functioning legal system for taking measures in cases of breaches of the legislation and for appropriate means of redress in respect of measures taken; c) systematic approaches (surveillance programs, follow up of scientific and technical knowledge, review and revision of the functioning of the activities) to ensure the effectiveness of market surveillance; d) customs control for checking conformity of products imported from third countries; e) system for co-operation between market/surveillance bodies with responsibilities in relation to enforcement of different types of consumer products as well as with customs (regulation 339/93); f) defined methodology for risk-assessment and access to technical expertise and competent and independent testing facilities for checking conformity of products; g) access to information on product dangers to the public respecting professional secrecy and restrictions required for monitoring and investigation activities; h) system for co-operation and information with producers and distributors and consumer associations with regard to providing and receiving information and exchange of experiences; i) system for providing rapid information to consumers and businesses through the media; j) system for ensuring administrative co-operation with other countries; k) co-operation with the national standardisation body with regard to the use of standards under the directive and to ensure co-operation of all parties concerned (including consumers) in the development of standards related to consumer products; l) systems for collection of product related injury data (such as the EU EHLASS programme); m) number of controls carried out and the results, the reasons for the controls (own initiative/complaints), type of products controlled, the geographical coverage of the controls, the way the controls have been carried out (ocular examination/testing). 
a)  
The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, State Agriculture Inspectorate, State Environment Inspectorate, Veterinary Administration – Veterinary Directorate, as well as the State Market Inspectorate, pursuant to regulations defining their authority as described in question A – General issues, under 3, b) and c), are responsible for market surveillance and enforcement of laws relating to general product safety, (for more details see 23_A_ _ _3). 
b) If during market surveillance, the responsible inspection bodies determine breach of legislation or law non-enforcement by legal entities and natural persons, they are obliged to issue a Decision by means of which an administrative measure, prescribed by law, shall be undertaken. The inspection services are authorised with the Decision to order for removal of the determined deficiencies in case there are no conditions for market circulation, to prohibit placing certain products on market due to inappropriate quality or expired product date of use, to obliterate defective products, to remove agricultural products from sale if they cause adverse effects on the health of people, plants and cattle, to prohibit fallacious advertising, to order replacement or reimbursement of purchased product etc. Pursuant to the Law, a Party has the right to an appeal against the Decision of the responsible inspector, within a period stipulated in the Decision. The appeals against the decisions of the responsible inspection bodies do not postpone their enforcement. Along with the Decision, the responsible inspectors are obliged to request for misdemeanour procedure, or to file criminal charges with the responsible court. 
c) 
The State Inspection Bodies carry out the supervision according to adopted programmes (annual programmes, semi-annual and quarterly plans). The Law on Organisation and Operation of the State Administrative  Bodies (“Official Gazette of the RM” No 58/00 and 44/02), as well as acts relating to public inspection bodies, provide for education of inspection bodies through different surveillance programmes, participation at scientific and educational seminars and meetings aimed at introducing the bodies with their work. 
d) 
Pursuant to the provisions of the Trade Law (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 16/04), goods can be imported only if fulfilling prescribed conditions as regards demonstrating evidence, issued by legally authorised bodies, before the customs administration units for fulfilling the special conditions. The customs administration bodies do not control conformity of products imported from third countries. Responsible non-customs institutions (State Market Inspectorate, State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, State Agriculture Inspectorate, Veterinary Administration – Veterinary Directorate, State Environment Inspectorate etc.) provide evidence for the conformity of the products and carry out the controls of products imported from third countries.  The non-customs institutions carry out the necessary controls and check conformity of products while performing customs supervision of goods, and before customs procedures are initiated by customs administration bodies. After obtaining the necessary evidence, the evidence is enclosed and retained in the customs declaration, and appropriate customs procedures can be initiated. In case the imported goods lack the evidence as required, the customs body shall not accept the customs declaration and shall not allow for customs clearance of goods. 
e) 
The public administration inspection bodies are obliged to mutually co-operate, and co-operate with other public administration bodies, whilst performing inspection activities of common interest pursuant to Article 53 of the Law on Organisation and Work of the State Administration Bodies. If irregularities are established during inspection supervision, inspection bodies are obliged to inform the responsible body i.e. inspection service which is to undertake appropriate measures within the frames of its authorisations. The co-operation with customs administration understands that product which is subject to customs control cannot be cleared and placed on the market of the Republic of Macedonia until evidence that imported products are in accordance with prescribed legal conditions is presented by the State Market Inspectorate, State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, State Agriculture Inspectorate, State Environment Inspectorate and Veterinary Administration – Veterinary Directorate. The responsible inspection bodies co-operate with non-customs institutions and officials of customs bodies on a regular operational basis as regards enforcement of activities and controls before and after import clearance of goods. Evidence verifying that goods are in accordance with the prescribed legal conditions, issued by different non-customs institutions, are enclosed in the customs declaration through customs declarer in writing, which is subject to customs bodies control upon request. In the Republic of Macedonia, a National Strategy for Integrated Border Management has been prepared, and the Law on Integrated Border Management Cooperation, supported by the European Agency for Reconstruction, is currently in enactment procedure, which shall prescribe the methods of joint co-operation in the field of border management. Agreements are foreseen to be concluded between administrative bodies involved in border management, in order to define competencies of parties, work procedures, mutual assistance modality, information and data exchange, access to central data base, public information, joint training and other activities that will improve service operations. This shall also relate to the issue of import and export of goods, aimed at consumers protection from unsafe goods. 
f) 
Legal regulations provide an opportunity for checking of products in accredited institutions for product certification and testing. The methodology of work (taking samples, procedures with samples, notifying owners of goods, notifying concerned parties etc.) is regulated by special laws and secondary legislation. Pursuant to the Law on Prescribing Technical Requirements for Products and Conformity Assessment (Official Gazette of the RM No. 55/02), certain types of products can be tested based on regulations in force. For example, according to the Law on Technical Inspection (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 48/99), the State Inspector for Steam Boilers and Pressurised Plants, controls the technical documentation and technical functionality during import of mobile pressurised tanks. After import of pressurised tanks – for liquid petroleum gas, installed in motor vehicles, the State Inspector controls the tanks by using methods determining pressure endurance in Bars. Afterwards, certain parts of the pulverised tanks are tested in authorised laboratories for testing material quality. The material quality is tested according to the producer’s documentation, and certificate of functionality is issued for each tank. 
g) 
Pursuant to the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01dangerous products shall be considered the products which have the form, scent, colour, appearance, packaging, labelling, volume or size and as such, it is possible that the consumers, especially children, misplace them for foodstuffs and place them in the mouth, suck or swallow them, which may be dangerous and may cause, for instance, suffocation, poisoning, perforation or obstruction of the digestive tract. At the same time, according to this Law, the producers, traders and distributors are obliged to provide information about the risks arising from certain products. In addition, pursuant to the Law, the producers and distributors, in cases when they know or presume that the products placed on the market are risky for the consumers, are obliged to undertake measures to withdraw the products from the market. The responsible inspection bodies, within the frames of their activities, shall determine which products are dangerous and shall initiate activities for determining their quality and risk for consumers, and afterwards undertake measures and co-operate with producers and consumers so as to remove the risks that could arise from certain products. The Law on Free Access to Information, currently in Parliamentary procedure, which will contribute towards determining the type of information that is not relevant for citizens, and it will also foresee an obligation for the public administration bodies as regards determining type and level of information relevant for citizens. 
h) 
Pursuant to Article 128 of the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of the RM” No 38/04), the associations of consumers are entitled to inform the competent inspection body when they learn about defective products and services or dangerous products and services. In addition, the associations are entitled to give information to the consumers regarding their rights and the events on the market. Pursuant to the Law on Market Inspection (“Official Gazette of the RM” No 35/97, 23/99, 07/02 and 20/02), the inspector is obliged to initiate procedures regarding the complaints of consumers and their associations relating to breach of regulations which are in the competence  of the market inspection. The inspector is obliged to inform the consumers who have lodged complaints on the determined situation and undertaken measures. The Macedonia Consumers Organisation actively co-operates with all inspection bodies competent in the consumer protection domain. Consumer complaints addressed to the Counselling Bureaus of the Macedonia Consumers Organisation are daily submitted to the competent inspection bodies, which undertake measures pursuant to legal regulation and afterwards inform the Organisation. The co-operation with the Macedonia Consumers Organisation is especially important in terms of preventive protection through information systems – “Infoteques”  for consumer rights, giving information to consumers about their rights and obligations, as well as information on certain events on the market. There is mutual co-operation in terms of exchange of experience through joint meetings and educational seminars. 
i) The competent governmental institutions and inspection bodies are authorised to inform the consumers about dangers and risks of certain products, by means of media, press-conferences and other means on information. The Macedonia Consumers Organisation communicates and co-operates with all printed and electronic media in the Republic of Macedonia, and makes efforts so as to introduce a higher level of transparency within its activities. j) The administrative co-operation with other countries in the field of consumer protection and safety on marker is regulated by bilateral and multilateral international treaties and agreements. Generally, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for administrative co-operation with other countries. k) Pursuant to the existing Law on Standardisation (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 54/02) the standards are applied on a voluntary basis, not obligatory. However, in order to prepare standards upon request of concerned parties, it is necessary to establish a special technical committee of the concerned parties, according to the Statute of the Standardisation Institute of the Republic of Macedonia, which may also include consumers depending on their interest or depending on how much the standard refers to the product standard, which is of interest for the consumers. The Standardisation Institute co-operates with international standardisation organisations, such as: CEN (European Committee for Standardization), CENELEC (European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization), IEC (International Electrotechnical Commission) and ISO (International Organization for Standardization). l) The Republic of Macedonia, at this moment does not have developed system for collection of product related injury data (such as the EU EHLASS programme).  m) The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate officially supervises all regions in the Republic of Macedonia on a regular basis (The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate which consists of 17 regional branches and 1 Border Surveillance Unit which has jurisdiction over the country’s border crossings.). Supervision is carried out in case there are grounds for suspicion or if citizens have lodged complaints. Supervision is also carried out upon request of producers and traders if it is required to independently obliterate food due to defects or expired date of use, in which case no administrative sanctions are undertaken. The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, in 2003, on the entire territory of the Republic, has performed 25.729 controls, out of which 6.127 controls of tourist-catering facilities, 8.501 controls of facilities for retail sale of food, 2.840 controls of facilities for manufacture food production, 687 controls of food wholesale facilities, 896 controls of facilities for industrial food production, 1.014 controls of social and educational facilities and camps for children, 71 control of public health institutions, 2.118 controls of private health institutions, 277 controls of city water-supplying facilities, 523 controls of local water-supplying systems, 26 controls of facilities releasing harmful substances in air, 811 controls of facilities for hygienic services, 125 controls of utilities and 1.004 controls of other facilities that were not mentioned previously. Regarding the performed inspection supervisions, 8.817 Decisions in administrative procedure were adopted in order to remove the established defects, as well as Decisions for temporary prohibition for use of facilities. State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate – Border Supervision Unit, in 2003, carried out health control of imported goods at customs terminals relating to a total of 21.020 requests submitted from importers. After completing the organoleptic control, five (5) decisions prohibiting the import of goods were adopted. 24.620 samples were tested in laboratories in connection with which 3 decisions were adopted due to microbiological contamination, and 28 decisions were adopted for the same products due to chemical incorrectness. Because there was no possibility of returning goods to the export-country, 14 decisions were adopted for obliteration of goods.  The samples are taken only by state sanitary and health inspectors, and the technical support covering hygienic sampling and transport is carried out with assistance of teams from regional institutes. The samples are tested in authorised laboratories – ten (10) regional health protection institutions, the National Health Protection Institute and the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine. The procedure, control and administrative measures to be undertaken shall depend on the results. The defective products may be obliterated, converted or processed, according to an adopted decision. In certain cases, the state sanitary and health inspectors may immediately obliterate organolepticallymodified food, if there is immediate risk on the health of people. 
Bureau of Medicines – The Inspection Supervision Unit, during 2003, performed 96 examinations in private health institutions – pharmacies. Pursuant to the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 21/98), the following controls were carried out in the field of retail sale of drugs, additional medical products and medical devices (pharmacies):   Approval for performing activity, and premises and equipment inspection   Examination of documentation for the employees, inclusive of sanitary record books   Examination of the correctness of drugs, records on drugs issued on prescription, efficient narcotics record keeping  Pursuant to these provisions of the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices, minutes were prepared concerning the current situation, and regarding the administrative measures, 12 decisions were adopted for closing pharmacies, and no misdemeanour charges were filed. There were 57 inspection controls of legal entities active in the wholesale of drugs, additional medical products and medical devices so as to harmonise their activities with the new Rulebook on Conditions Relating to Premises, Equipment and Personnel for Legal Entities Active in the Wholesale of Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 06/02). All inspected wholesale pharmacies were harmonised with the Rulebook. During 2003, the producers of drugs, additional medicines and medical instruments in the Republic of Macedonia were inspected, by the Inspectorates indicated bellow. Minutes were prepared about the established deficiencies and irregularities concerning the premises, equipment and personnel. The harmonisation of production capacities for drugs is currently ongoing, as well as the adjustment with the standards of Good Production Practice and Good Laboratory Practice, prescribed with the Law on Drugs, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices. 
The State Market Inspectorate controls the food and non-food products on the national market, and also controls the agricultural imported food products. During 2003, a total of 25.917 controls were carried out at the national market. As regards the established defects, 4101 administrative procedure decisions were adopted, 9.266 requests for filing misdemeanour charges, and mandatory fines in an amount of 909.000 Denars. Furthermore, 942 complaints of citizens were submitted. Quality control of imported agricultural food products is carried out at the customs terminals. In 2003, 17.592 requests were submitted.  Product control is executed with organoleptic examination, and by taking samples, which are afterwards submitted to authorised institutions for chemical analysis. Certificates for 5.974 requests were issued based on the performed organoleptic examination, and based on the samples and analysis – certificates for 11.606 requests were issued. In addition, 39 decisions were adopted for rejecting the request for issuing the certificate of quality.  The State Market Inspectorate supervises the entire territory of the Republic of Macedonia through its organisation units. The inspector may take samples and send them for analysis to authorised professional institutions for quality control. The procedures and measures to be undertaken depend on the results. In certain cases, for certain products, the inspector is authorised by law to carry out organoleptic control. 
The State Veterinary Inspection, in 2003, has carried out 13.360 official controls of animal origin items out of which: 7.964 during import, 1.023 during export and 4.373 during transit. During controls and inspections in the production and trade process, the following products were confiscated as hygienically unsafe: 54.091 kg meat in internal trade, 2.513 kg imported and 25.541 kg exported; 24.814 kg meat products in internal trade, 17.655 kg dairy products in internal trade, and 2.785 kg fish and fish products in internal trade. Furthermore, controls were carried out concerning trade in other types of products, raw materials and animal origin residues, as well as fodder such as: leather, wool,intestines, fat, fish meal, etc.) The veterinary-sanitary control is carried out on regular basis according to prepared annual programme, on daily basis if there is initiative of an individual, and in case there are complaints concerning the production process in internal and foreign trade in items of animal origin. The control includes several procedures such as: examination of supporting documentation, item identity, production facilities, production and storing equipment, means of transportation, organoleptic examination of products and taking samples for testing in authorised laboratories concerning the health related correctness and harmful residues. Inspections and controls were carried out on the entire territory of the state as regards internal trade, and at border points as regards foreign trade.  
The State Agricultural Inspectors, for 2003, have carried out on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia 4.007 controls, prepared 3.698 minutes and adopted 535 decisions for removing defects of products and termination of production, as well as 18.087 controls at border crossings of imported products of vegetable origin and 26.475 controls of products intended for export. The controls were official and upon complaints of consumers.  The State Agricultural Inspectorate, officially and upon complaints of consumers, has carried out controls of 8.037 tonnes of different types of seeds, out of which 77.480 kg of different types of seeds were temporarily confiscated and removed from the market. 1.365.467 items of plant material (fruit and vine) were inspected, out of which 67.707 items were temporarily confiscated and removed from the market, and a part was destroyed. 8.146 tonnes of fertilizers were inspected and 1.039 tonnes were removed from the market. 2.509 tonnes of fodder were inspected, and 112 tonnes were removed from the market pursuant to a decision of the inspector.  In order to precisely determine the quality of confiscated seed, fertilizers, fodder and wine, inspectors gave 184 samples to be tested in laboratories. According to the results, 6 samples were defective. Operational activities were carried out by the agricultural inspection through controls and supervisions in 2.868 enterprises, 123 associations, 959 natural persons. 
The State Environment Inspectorate submitted 66 requests for misdemeanour charges and two (2) for criminal charges in the period 2002 – 2004. To date, 23 requests for misdemeanour charges were solved, 4 requests were rejected as obsolete and the remaining are in ongoing court procedure. 
2. Please give some indication of the level of activities in the field of market surveillance by providing statistics, as available, referring to some of the following examples: a) number of complaints received, from whom and actions undertaken; b) number and types of measures taken by market surveillance authorities; c) number and types of measures taken by customs authorities; d) number and types of product safety cases dealt with by the courts, average time-frame for a decision and average time for enforcement; e) number and type of rapid-alert measures notified to and from the central point and documentation on follow-up to such notifications; f) activities undertaken (meetings, information documents etc.) for ensuring co-ordination between authorities and interaction with economic operators and consumer organisations; g) information activities directed to the public; h) routines and meetings between product safety authorities and customs to ensure co-ordination of the customs control; i) details of systems for ensuring a systematic approach to control activities; j) statistics on injuries related to products; k) systems established to ensure consumer participation in relevant standardisation work; l) statistics relating to sales figures of consumer products, origin of the products etc. 


b) The State Market Inspectorate received 942 complaints regarding the protection of consumer rights by citizens in 2003. The complaints were mainly filed by natural persons. The State Market Inspectors took immediate actions upon the complaints, during which they correctly established the factual situation and undertook administrative measures prescribed by law. Due to the actions taken by the inspectors of the State Market Inspectorate, all of the justified consumer complaints were resolved positively. 942 supervisions were made, and 872 decisions on administrative measures were reached, ordering traders to act in accordance with the law, and the consumers’ requests were satisfied. In the area of consumer protection, a total of 25,917 supervisions were made upon complaints and ex officio, resulting in 9,266 misdemeanour procedures; 6 filed criminal charges; 4,101 decisions on administrative procedures; temporarily seized products turned over to the courts with the total value of 13.333.675 MKD; and products put out of circulation because of expired validity or lack of quality with the total value of 5.372.762 MKD. The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate acts immediately upon every written or oral complaint filed by natural persons or legal entities, as well as by consumer associations regarding the sanitary validity of products. Complaints generally regard food products.  Because of unsafe imported products and disregard of decisions brought by the State Sanitary and Health Inspectors, 12 charges for misdemeanours were filed before the competent courts in 2003. 128 charges for initiating misdemeanour procedures were filed for domestic products because of disregard of inspectors' decisions. 504 decisions prohibiting the use of objects until defects’ removal were brought because of severe sanitary and hygienic norms violations. The State Agricultural Inspectorate filed 782 charges for misdemeanour procedures in 2003, from which 88 charges were filed for misdemeanours committed by legal entities, while the rest of 694 charges, or 88.75%, by natural persons. From the 782 filed charges for misdemeanour procedures, 90 charges, or 11.50%, were resolved, while 63 offenders were fined. From the charges filed in 2002 and 2003, 339 were resolved in 2003, while the offenders were fined with a total amount of 1.070.620 MKD.  The Veterinary Directorate made a total of 13.360 controls of shipments of animal origin at the border crossings in 2003, pursuant to the Law on Veterinary Health (“Official Gazette of the RM No.” 28/98), from which 7.964 controls of shipments for import, 1.023 controls of shipments for export, and 4.373 controls of shipments for transfer. In 2003, 1.543 minutes on prevention and eradication of contagious diseases were prepared, and 506 decisions on taking measures for eliminating defects were brought. In the process, 2 on-the-spot fines were pronounced, 157 misdemeanour charges were filed, from which only one was resolved, and 2 legal entities and 39 natural persons were fined. During control of animals (without a certificate) and other products, 77 minutes were prepared, 33 decisions were brought, and 2 on-the-spot fines were pronounced. From the total of 35 misdemeanour charges filed, 22 were resolved. Within the control of processed products of animal origin, the State Veterinary Inspection has prepared 416 official records on the basis of which 46 decisions were brought, and one filed misdemeanour charge was not resolved. During the controls of the storage and circulation of products of animal origin, 835 minutes were prepared, and 357 decisions were brought. From the total of 19 misdemeanour charges filed, 3 were resolved, while 2 natural persons and 1 legal entity were fined. State Veterinary Inspection prepared 2 minutes and brought 1 decision during the control of the storage and circulation of waste of animal origin. It also filed 2 misdemeanour charges, from which 1 was resolved, and 2 legal entities were fined. The State Veterinary Inspection, during the control of products and medicines, pursuant to the Law on Medicines, Additional Medical Products and Medical Devices (“Official Gazette of the RM No.” 21/98) conducted 8 controls and brought 1 decision. There were a total of 944 decisions brought, and 214 misdemeanour charges were filed.  The consumers also file complaints with the Macedonian Consumer Organisation. The Macedonian Consumer Organisation received 3,251 consumer complaints during 2003. Out of those, 652 were personal complaints, 2,144 were received by telephone, 387 in written form, and 338 during organised group counselling.  From the complaints received, it may be concluded that most of the complaints, or 1,690 complaints relate to problems the citizens have with warranties and warranty claims; with instructions for use not translated into Macedonian; products with low quality; manufacture  services with low quality; problems with travel agencies; not visible price list; non-issuance of receipts, etc. Further, 226 complaints relate to medical patients rights; 53 in the area of insurance and financial services; 416 relate to housing; 483 are complaints on the public enterprises services, mostly concerning the services of Macedonian Telecommunications AD and JSC (Electric Power Company of Macedonia), that still hold a monopoly on the market. In the area of diet and food products, there have been a total of 608 complaints, which have mostly concerned the sales of food products with expired validity; improper declaring and labelling of products; products with low quality; improper storing; counterfeited packaging; 33 complaints related to ecology; and 12 complaints related to counselling for choice of products.  All the complaints submitted to the Counselling Bureaus of the Macedonian Consumer Organisation were documented with an minutes, and the counsellors acted upon them accordingly. After considering the submitted documents and the allegations of the consumer, the Macedonian Consumer Organisation first contacts the trader or the service provider for the purpose of resolving the consumer’s complaint.  Pursuant to the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01consumers' associations may intermediate in consumer disputes between traders and consumers relating to products or services bought. The percentage of successfully resolved cases with the mediation of the Macedonian Consumer Organisation is 25%. If the mediation is not successful, the Macedonian Consumer Organisation files a complaint before the competent inspection service. In certain cases, which most often relate to problems with public enterprises, the complaint is filed with the Ombudsman of the Republic of Macedonia and the Commission for Protection of Competition. After the measures taken by the inspection bodies in accordance with the legal regulations, information is served to the Counselling Bureaus of the Macedonian Consumer Organisation about the way the consumers' complaints are resolved. The percentage of cases resolved through the competent inspection bodies, the Ombudsman of the Republic of Macedonia and the Commission for Protection of Competition is 50%.  It means that a total of 75% of the filed consumer complaints were successfully resolved in 2003. 
c) Considering the fact that prior to every import, a document issued by a competent non-customs body certifying that the prescribed conditions have been met needs to be submitted, the customs bodies undertake the following measures: 
  keeping of goods under customs surveillance until the required documents are submitted;    control of the received documents and of their compliance with the goods and other documents;   rejection or refusal of customs declaration lacking the necessary documents;    bringing a decision for returning the goods abroad, or confiscation, provided that its entrance is not forbidden, if there are no appropriate documents/evidence submitted within the prescribed period for implementation of customs procedures, with which the goods acquire a status of goods the import of which is banned;   informing the competent non-customs bodies for cases in which there is a suspicion of misuse;   informing the competent non-customs bodies for defects discovered after an additional control relating to the issued evidence, their use, or the lack of documents.  There are no data available on the measures undertaken within the customs service. d) Pursuant to Article 51 of the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 38/04), the damage caused by an unsafe product is compensated according to the regulations stipulated in the Law on Obligations (“Official Gazette of the RM” No. 18/01, 4/02 and 5/03). Since this Law applies to all the damage compensation disputes, even in consumer disputes, the courts do not keep a separate records of consumer disputes, but they are registered as damage compensation disputes in the single register in the civil and commercial court departments. At the same time, this practice is due to the fact that the plaintiffs do not state that the legal basis of their suit is a compensation of damage caused by an unsafe product, unsatisfactory service, a product which does not comply with the declaration, a product with an expired validity etc., but use the general formula “damage compensation”. This is the reason that a clear answer relating to the number of cases that have ended before the courts cannot be given. In practice, most usual examples of such disputes are the ones for damage compensation on the basis of defective products (an airbag in a car has not opened, incorrect functioning of a product within the warranty period, putting into circulation of products with expired validity, lack of instructions for use of the product in Macedonian and its Cyrillic alphabet). The length of the disputes depends on: the number of parties in the proceedings; the evidence presented with the lawsuit and the response to them; the need of presenting verbal evidence; the need of forensic expertise; the value of the dispute; the direct engagement of the participants in the procedure etc. If the dispute is with a small value, not exceeding 30.000 MKD, and if a proposal for issuing a temporary measure is given, these disputes end up more quickly and last for 6 months at an average for getting a first instance verdict. For the verdict to come into force, the usual period is 1 year from the initiation of the dispute. Other disputes have longer periods of settlement. The enforcement of judicial decisions, pursuant to the Law on Executive Procedure (“Official Gazette of the RM”  No. 53/97, 59/00 and 64/03), is immediate, however, because of the large number of cases waiting on enforcement in general, the enforcement of these disputes also lasts longer. This is also due to the legal possibility for the debtor to use a large number of legal remedies (objections) for which the court has to reach a decision which, again, might be appealed. 
e) The rapid-alert measures are carried out through the Republic Information Centre. For all cases where an evaluation of the product’s risk was done the alert was realised through the Republic Centre. A total of 32 alerts were sent during 2003.  The introduction and application of the Rapid Alert System for quick spread of information and taking appropriate measures is in progress. This system will be implemented by a Unit within the Food Directorate, and it officially started its work from 01.01.2005. The main purpose of the programme is protection of consumers’ health through establishing a new institutional system for taking professional and administrative measures in the area of food safety, as well as reforming the food control system in compliance with the European Union legislation and in respect of the obligations taken upon with the membership in the WTO. The Food Directorate will have competence over the control of all food products. In compliance with the EU Regulations, this Directorate will analyse its own data, as well as the information from other relevant institutions, and will make a complete data analysis, which will enable characterisation and monitoring of risks which have direct or indirect effect on product and cattle feed safety (in compliance with the Regulations 178/2002/EC and 882/2004/C). The Food Directorate will implement activities for coordinated actions together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy and the Ministry of Economy relating to food and cattle feed safety, as well as direct cooperation and coordination with the Veterinary Directorate, the Plant Protection Directorate, and the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, through activities  to be implemented through a scientific and counselling inter-ministerial body (Macedonian Codex Commission), as well as through the committees which will operate as dispatches of the Food Directorate, and which will include all professional profiles necessary for risk evaluation. For the purposes of all the above, the Rapid Alert System shall be implemented during 2005.  
f) Pursuant to the Consumer Protection Law, the Unit for Consumer Protection within the Ministry of Economy organises several types of meetings and cooperates with the competent inspection bodies, the consumer associations, as well as with the competent state bodies and organisations, and the Macedonian Chamber of Commerce.  The Unit for Consumer Protection within the Ministry of Economy cooperates closely with the Macedonian Consumer Organisation. On the basis of such cooperation, representatives of the legal group of the Macedonian Consumer Organisation have participated in the preparation of the new Consumer Protection Law with their suggestions and proposals. There have been several working meetings on different subjects, and several joint public debates and professional seminars have been organised. The Counselling Bureaus of the Macedonian Consumer Organisation cooperate with the State Market Inspectorate, hold meetings and consultations on different subjects in the consumer protection area: rapid response upon their complaints; follow-up upon measures taken by the inspectorate; and participate in the bulletin “Consumer” published by the Macedonian Consumer Organisation, and there are efforts for timely undertaking of actions upon the initiatives proposed by the Macedonian Consumer Organisation and relating to consumer protection. The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, the State Market Inspectorate, the Veterinary Directorate, the State Agriculture Inspectorate and other institutions, and the Macedonian Consumer Organisation, closely cooperate in their regular work, inform each other about the established irregularities on the market, and jointly take appropriate measures. 
g) The Ministry of Economy has informed the consumers through the media in a timely manner for all the cases of faulty merchandise put into circulation (as it was the case with the milk, meat, fruit juices, mineral water and other products). The competent inspection bodies publish the irregularities found and established during the inspections in a transparent way, cooperate with the press and the electronic media through public announcements, press conferences, etc. h) During the import of goods the trader is obliged to submit documents before the customs procedures, as it is regulated by the current Trade Law (“Official Gazette of the RM”  No. 16/04), and the strengthening of these controls is a constant subject of different meetings between the inspection bodies and the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia. The procedures and the way of ensuring safety control of the products imported into Republic of Macedonia are established separately on these meetings. Joint meetings of customs and non-customs bodies are held occasionally, as needed, and especially for the cases of adopting or amending the legislation, or when problems during operations are discovered. On an operational level, the contacts between the competent inspectors of the non-customs bodies and the customs bodies’ officers are established on a daily basis. With the signing of the Agreement on Cooperation Between the Agencies Working on Customs Control Locations on 23.01.2002 between the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Interior, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Ministry of Health, and the Ministry of Economy, including the bodies within their organisation, as well as with the Public Enterprise for Housing and Business Premises Management, an attempt was made for standardisation and intensification of the cooperation between those agencies on the border crossings and all the locations with internal customs offices. Local project teams were formed in four test locations, consisting of representatives from every contractual party. The members of the local project team meet at least once a month or when needed, to discuss important issues related to the activities on the test location. The administrative managements of the appropriate contractual parties approve the proposals submitted by the local project teams, unless they establish that the proposals cannot be implemented because of legal or regulatory obstacles. In that case, the superior body elaborates the issue to the management of the contractual party at the test location, including a proposal to amend the proposal in order for it to be legally acceptable. The contractual parties form a Cooperation Committee consisting of high level representatives from the administrative managements of every contractual party. The Cooperation Committee should meet at least once in three months to discuss the approved proposals submitted by the administrative managements, and to propose expanding of their application on all locations in the Republic of Macedonia. If a need arises, or on the basis of the submitted proposals, the Cooperation Committee initiates amendment of the legislation which should enable simplification of the trade and transport, having in mind the need of harmonisation of the legislation of the Republic of Macedonia with the European Union legislation and with other international agreements to which the Republic of Macedonia is a Party. i) The control activities of inspection bodies in the Republic of Macedonia are performed on the basis of the legislation and previously approved annual programmes, semi-annual and quarterly operational plans of these bodies.  j) The State Statistical Office does not have data on injuries caused by usage of unsafe products. k) Pursuant to the Consumer Protection Law, the consumer associations, amongst other things, are entitled to express opinions on draft laws and other regulations for consumer protection, and to be informed by the competent bodies on the preparation of regulations in the area of consumer protection.  l) Table: Sales figures by activities of the distributive trades, according to the principal activity of the business entity 
2000 in % 2001  in % 2002 in % 2003 in % Total 127.303.246 100,0 115.878.787 100,0 119.637.287 100,0 138.796.947  100,0 Wholesale 43.127.437 33,9 36.453.186 31,5 38.059.086 31,8 45.025.860  32,4 Mediation in wholesale 1.011.842 0,8 1.046.747 0,9  856.131 0,7  914.570  0,7 Retail trade 28.602.409 22,5 31.332.971 27,0 32.492.067 27,2 38.465.158  27,7 Repairs 267.797 0,2  261.508 0,2  343.588 0,3  281.921  0,2 Other activities 54.293.761 42,6 46.784.375 40,4 47.886.415 40,0 54.109.438  39,0 indexes 2001/2000 indexes 2002/2001 indexes 2003/2002 10 11 12 Total 91,0 103,2 116,0 Wholesale 84,5 104,4 118,3 Mediation in wholesale 103,4 81,8 106,8 Retail trade 109,5 103,7 118,4 Repairs 97,7 131,4 82,1 Other activities 86,2 102,4 113,0 Indexes of the sales figures in the retail trade 2001/2000 2002/2001 2003/2002 2 3 4 Nominal indexes 91,6 106,3 113,9 The State Statistical Office does not calculate the sales figures according to the origin of products yet. Source - State Statistical Office

Table: Sales figures of retail trade by product groups In thousands MKD  1999 2000 2001 Total 40.413.343 49.105.964 44.996.685 Food products 13.691.644 14.475.592 14.352.091 Tobacco 1.228.031 1.834.795 985.304 Textiles 1.355.682 1.298.815 1.177.191 Leather and rubber 886.905 784.563 490.587 Fuel 110.675 131.587 109.976 Metal products 2.863.657 3.589.739 3.840.428 Porcelain, glass and ceramics 151.962 208.539 136.205 Electro-technical goods  860.970 960.691 834.985 Chemical products 3.839.046 4.552.478 4.582.615 Paper and paper products  530.171 472.030 460.524 Woods products 675.406 1.014.276 550.297 Liquid fuels and lubricants 11.727.816 15.837.159 13.232.831 Construction materials 225.284 544.486 720.546 Other products 2.266.094 3.401.214 3.523.102 
The data on retail trade sales figures by product groups are taken from the Statistical Yearbook 2002. 


Table: Imports grouped according to intended use of products In thousands $ US  2000 2001 2002 Consumer goods 408.679 355.431 471.189 Food products 154.105 146.797 177.528 Beverages and tobacco 8.201 9.477 9.593 Clothing and footwear 16.605 17.493 19.259 Furniture 12.738 10.448 12.336 Textiles 7.255 6.093 6.600 Medical, pharmaceutical and cosmetic products  49.319 50.415 60.558 Other consumer goods 160.457 114.709 185.315 The data on imports grouped according to intended use of products are taken from the Statistical Yearbook 2003. 
3. For which of these product categories have you carried out specific market surveillance activities in the last three years? a) Child-care articles (e.g. teething rings, pacifier chains, babywalkers, folding cots); b) playground equipment; c) furniture (e.g. bunk beds, flammability of upholstered furniture); d) do-it-yourself equipment (e.g. ladders); e) leisure equipment (e.g. bicycles, climbing equipment, bounce castles); f) clothing (flammability risks, strangulation risks); g) decorative articles (e.g. imitation fruit, Christmas decorations, candles); h) products containing chemicals (e.g. phthalates in PVC-products); i) products for children, other than toys (e.g. products attractive to children, children’s swim seats, playpens); j) cigarette lighters; k) laser pointers; l) medicines. 



With regard to the control of products intended for use by young children, i.e. teething rings, pacifiers, pacifier chains, children’s toys, etc., the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate carries out the control in accordance with the Rulebook on Conditions Regarding the Sanitary Safety of General Consumption Products Allowed to be put into Circulation (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 26/83) and the Law on Sanitary Safety of Foodstuffs and General Consumption Products (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 53/91).  A new Rulebook on the Properties of Children’s Toys put into Circulation, harmonised with the Council Directive for approximation of the regulations of the Member States regarding the safety of toys 88/378/EEC, has been prepared. This Rulebook regulates the mechanical, physical, electrical and hygienic properties of children’s toys put into circulation, and also regulates the way of labelling and marking children’s toys, with a special emphasis on the need of compulsory warning about the risks presented by their usage, as well as about the ways for avoiding such risks. In the Republic of Macedonia, there is one production line for children’s toys (for children’s balls). The raw materials for the production line are imported from Germany and are monitored by the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate for Border Surveillance. The final product is also monitored by laboratory analyses of product series for the level of migration of heavy metals.  Children’s toys are mainly imported from third countries. Greatest quantities are imported from the Republic of China and from the Member States of the European Union. Every shipment imported into the Republic of Macedonia is monitored by the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate for Border Surveillance at the customs terminals.  The monitoring includes:   Check up of the vehicle transporting the children’s toys (of the sanitary conditions).    Organoleptic examination of the children’s toys:  - For extrusions, sharp or serrated edges; - For their smoothness, they should be coated with a protective coating; - For ingredients generally harmful to health;  - For properties that might cause physical injuries during usage; - For properties of the toy’s moving parts that might cause physical injuries; - For prevention of contact with toys that may be swallowed (for children under 3 years of age); - For shedding of natural hairs; - For flammability; - For explosive elements or substances. Samples for analysis are taken after the organoleptic examination is done. The laboratory examination checks the migration of heavy metals, the microbiological safety, and the phthalates (depending on the composition and the components of the product). Imported products are put into circulation with a decision of the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate for Border Surveillance.  The special activities taken by State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate – Border Surveillance Unit in recent years regard the presence of additives from the phthalates group, used as softeners for the products, in the PVC children’s toys. The special analyses of samples taken from the market relate to examining for presence of phthalates as additives for softening the product in the toys imported from the Republic of China and the United Arab Emirates. The highly expert and educated personnel, using the modern equipment in the possession of the PHO State Healthcare Institute, has found that the results of the tests for releasing phthalates at room temperature were negative. During the special analyses of PVC children’s toys for children up to 3 years of age, special consideration was given to the recommendations of the European Union for presence and release of phthalates from these products.  b) There is no available data on activities for monitoring playground equipment by the inspection services.  c) There is no available data on activities for monitoring furniture by the inspection services.  d) There is no available data on activities for monitoring do-it-yourself equipment by the inspection services.  e) There is no available data on activities for monitoring leisure equipment by the inspection services.  f) There is no available data on activities for monitoring clothing (flammability risks, strangulation risks) by the inspection services.  g) Decorative articles are monitored by the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate pursuant to the Rulebook on Quality of General Consumption Products put into Circulation (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 26/83). The monitoring is carried out on every imported and circulated shipment pursuant to the Annual Working Programme of the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate.  h) The State Environment Inspectorate monitors the products containing chemicals (PVC products).  The products, semi-products and raw materials, as well as their packaging, are allowed to be put into circulation only if they are labelled – pursuant to the Law on Environment and Nature Protection and Promotion (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 13/03 (revised text)) – for the risk of pollution and the effect they might have on the environment and people’s health. Pursuant to the Draft Law on Environment, the producers and importers of chemical substances or products have the obligation, prior to selling or importing, to provide data on their properties and effects, according to which they might be classified, packed and sold; and if the packaging is not solid, to label them completely and appropriately, as determined by this Law or by the regulations adopted on the basis of this law. Dangerous chemical substances or products shall not be sold if their packaging is not solid, completely and appropriately sealed and labelled. The way of classification of pollutants, the form and the structure of packaging, as well as the type of materials that must be used for packaging, the form and the content of the labelling with a noticeable warning sign, and the content of the declaration issued during sales of chemical substances and products will be regulated with secondary legislation. Pursuant to the Law on Waste Management (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 68/04),  It is expressly prohibited:   To produce, import or trade in PCBs (Polychlorinated Biphenyls);   To reuse and process waste PCBs, and   To fill and refill equipment with PCB. Legal entities and natural persons in possession of PCBs, used PCB and PCB equipment are obliged to register the quantities, origin, nature and contents of PCB, used PCB and equipment containing PCB with the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning within a year since the day of the entry into force of the law. At the same time, the legal entities and natural persons are obliged to label the equipment containing or that has contained PCB, as well as to keep records of the treatment of PCB, of the used PCB and the PCB equipment, in accordance with this law and other regulations. Pursuant to the same Law, the production, importation and circulation of batteries and car batteries containing more than 0.0005 mass percent mercury, including batteries and car batteries incorporated in devices and equipment, is also prohibited. The production, importation and circulation of unmarked batteries and car batteries containing:    more than 25 milligrams of mercury per cell, except alkaline-manganese batteries;   more than 0.025 mass percent cadmium;   more than 0.4 mass percent lead; is also prohibited. The State Market Inspectorate, together with the State Environmental Inspectorate, monitors the enforcement of the Law on Waste Management for the part of circulation of products and packaging, labelling of products and packaging, and informing of consumers.  Bearing in mind that the Law entered into force in November 2004, and it will be implemented from 2005, the monitoring measures pursuant to this Law are not yet implemented.  The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate controls all the products and items that have direct contact with food and are being made of PVC, metal, wood, paper, textiles etc., and laboratory analyses for the possible migration of heavy metals above permitted levels are being conducted. The children’s toys are monitored for the presence of phthalates in laboratory. The recommendations of the European Union are implemented in that segment. i) No special market surveillance activities have been carried out on products attractive to children, and are not toys, except on plastic products serving as swimming aid for children (swim seats) or plastic children fences which are not produced in the Republic of Macedonia, but are imported from other countries – they fall under the jurisdiction of the State market inspectors for border surveillance and regular laboratory analyses are being carried out for every shipment. However, there are no records about the number of inspections of the circulation of these products. j) There is no available data on activities for monitoring cigarette lighters by the inspection services.  k) There is no available data on activities for monitoring laser pointers by the inspection services.  l) In the last three years, in continuity or following a report by authorised institutions or individuals, the Bureau of Medicines – Inspection Supervision Unit has carried out monitoring of medicines. Some medicines were confiscated or withdrawn from circulation for lack of quality, safety or efficiency, i.e. for emergence of unwanted effects, inappropriate packaging and labelling (declaration on the packaging), for lack of certificate for putting into circulation, lack of quality or conformity with the regulations for medicines under special regime, and there has been a number of bans on carrying out business activities. 
4. For product-categories for which no activities were carried out: what was the reason that no activities were carried out? 
For product categories for which no activities have been carried out, the reasons are as follows:   Lack of regulations and standards;   The inspection bodies have no authority;   Insufficient funds for financing possible testing. 
5. For categories for which activities were carried out: choose randomly some of the products falling under the categories of products under question 3 as examples to provide answers to the following questions: a) Why did you choose these products? Examples: i) Accidents involving the product. ii) Risk reported by the manufacturer. iii) Risk reported by conformity assessment (testing, certification) bodies. iv) Risk reported through an alert network. v) Risk reported through a national alert network (e.g. hospital services). vi) Action by consumer associations or an individual consumer. vii) Complaint from a competitor. viii) Information from another country (bilateral contact). ix) Risk reported by customs. x) Special risk covered by a sectoral or seasonal surveillance programme. xi) Random check. b) How was the surveillance organised for these products? Examples: i) Timing and frequency of checks (e.g. before placing on the market, during customs clearance, after placing on the market, in use) ii) Locations where the checks were carried out (e.g. places of design, manufacture, packaging, storage, sale, in use, goods transport vehicles, roadside checks, customs control) iii) Control procedures (e.g. documentary or in-situ checks, visual checks (marking, etc.), requests for technical documents, sampling, testing in government laboratories, testing in private laboratories) iv) Resources used (e.g. administrative and judicial authorities involved, numbers of staff assigned, spending) v) Time elapsing between the first check and final decision c) Which measures were taken as a result of the checks? (If the measures were temporary, for how long did they apply?) Examples: i) Product deemed compliant. ii) Party responsible merely required to bring the product into compliance. iii) Product banned from the market until brought into compliance. iv) Product withdrawn from the market until brought into compliance. v) Product impounded. vi) Product ordered to be destroyed. vii) Product recalled. viii) Information and warning for consumers (how?) ix) Recall of the product from consumers (how?) x) Civil or penal sanctions (to whom?). 
а) We have chosen the teething baby products, products containing chemicals (PVC products) and swimming aids because they relate to the protection of children and other consumers. Monitoring activities for these products are carried out in compliance with the safety measures that may be applied for this product category - products coming in contact with little children and present a health risk for this segment of the population. Also, special activities for control of these products are being carried out following the recommendations of the European Union because of the contents of additives which in certain circumstances might cause detriment of health with children. 
i) There are no records that this product category has caused accidents. The continuity in carrying out activities in accordance with the annual plans, and the special monitoring activities carried out by the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate contribute to the non-existence of accidents caused by these products.  ii)  There are no risks reported by the manufacturers. iii)  There are no risks reported by the authorised institution for testing and conducting laboratory research on this product category. All laboratory analyses conducted in 2003, 116 on imported products and 2 laboratory analyses on domestic products, are with safe results.  iv)  There is no reported risk for this product category.  v)  There is no risk reported through the Republic Centre for Information, nor through the hospital services.  vi)  The Consumers’ Organisation has not taken action, nor has reported anything to the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate relating to this product category during 2003.  vii)  There are no records. viii)  We have received information from the European Union (in 1999 and in 2004) with regard to the presence and release of phthalates from children's PVC toys made in and imported from Asian countries.  ix)  There are no records of risks reported by customs. x)  The surveillance procedure described in the answer to the question 3-a by the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate for Border Surveillance is carried out through the annual plans and with the seasonal programmes of the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, which reduces the risk from these products to a minimum. xi)  Taking samples for laboratory analyses for part of these products is done by random choice.  b)  i)  All imported products are being checked at the customs terminals or at the border crossings, following the importer’s request. For products from domestic production, the products being placed on the market, and in use, the surveillance is carried out pursuant to the Inspectorate's annual plan - in continuity and in compliance with the legislation.  ii)  The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate is authorised for controlling these products on all  locations stated in the question, except for the roadside checks. 
iii)  The control procedures include: checking of the documentation stipulated by law or secondary legislation, checking of the producer’s in-situ checks, visual check with filing a report, taking samples for analysis and their examination in authorised laboratories.  iv)  There are no activities that involve administrative or judicial authorities regarding the safety of the stated products.  v)  The time elapsed between the first check and the final decision is two days in average, and 10 days in cases of non-compliance with certain conditions.  c) Examples: i)  ii)   iii)  iv)  v)  vi)  vii)  viii)  ix)  The answer to this question is generally given in the answer to the questions C. b). 3. a),h) l) and C. b). 5. a), b), (for more details see 23_C_ _ _3). In the cases when the inspection bodies decide on temporary measures, the irregularities should be eliminated within the period specified by the inspector, pursuant to the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01. At the same time, the inspection bodies are obliged do submit a request for filing a misdemeanour charge against these cases, after which the competent court may decide on a safety measure – ban on carrying out business activities for a period of 1 to 4 years. x)  
In civil procedure, pursuant to the provisions of the Law on Civil Procedure (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 33/98 and 44/02) and the Consumer Protection Law, there is no possibility for the court to decide on a civil penalty. Such possibility exists for the litigations for copyright and related rights protection, and for the litigations for industrial property rights protection (patents, trade marks, industrial designs, etc.). 
6. Have the results of these activities and the experience acquired influenced subsequent market surveillance activities? In most of the cases, measures taken by the competent inspection bodies for eliminating the irregularities found have had a positive effect on the traders and the producers.  
7. Who were informed about the activity and/or the outcome – in general or with regard to specific products (e.g. media, other countries, etc.)? 
As far as the activities of the Ministry of Economy, and the State Market Inspectorate are concerned, the public is informed through a standardized procedure applied by the Spokesman of the relevant Ministry. Different communication channels for distribution of information are applied, depending on the type and purpose of information. The exchange of information with media is carried out through: answering questions, submitting service information, occasional briefings etc. The citizens are also communicated through placing the information on the Web page of the Ministry of Economy. 
8. What practical difficulties were encountered in carrying out the activities? 
In general, the inspection bodies always put maximum efforts in terms of determining and removing the deficiencies of certain products, determined during supervision. The main problem of the inspection bodies, in carrying out activities and performing the surveillance is lack of funds necessary for equipment, which would contribute towards better and more efficient results concerning the inspection operations and supervision. 