A. GENERAL QUESTIONS 

1. Is consumer protection recognised as a specific policy in your country? Are there specific rules on consumer protection in other policy areas? 
Yes, consumer policy in the Republic of Macedonia is identified as a specific policy, and it is incorporated in the highest legal act – the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, as well as in the separate Consumer Protection Law from 2000 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 63/00 and 4/02). The activities regarding this policy are an ongoing process, following the experiences from the process of implementation of the Law, and the novelties in the regulation of consumer protection in EU, which has resulted with the adoption of the new Consumer Protection Law in 2004 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01There are specific regulations in the legal system of the Republic of Macedonia in the areas of civil, administrative and criminal legislation, which directly or indirectly apply to consumer protection.  
2. Please describe the institutional set-up for consumer affairs in your country. 
Consumer protection in the Republic of Macedonia has been institutionalised through the activities of two sectors, one consisting of the State Administrative Bodies and other authorities and institutions of the public sector, and the other consisting of non-governmental organizations with activities directly or indirectly focused on different aspects of consumer protection. With regard to the first sector, and having in mind the multidisciplinary nature of consumer protection, several authorities and institutions of the administration bodies and the public sector have direct and/or indirect competencies in this domain, which are defined with the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, and other laws, as follows:   Government of the Republic of Macedonia (creation of consumer policy, adoption of Consumer Protection Programme);   Council for Consumer Protection within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia (proposal of measures and activities, monitoring the implementation of the Consumer Protection Programme, assessment of the market situation, etc.)   Council for Consumer Protection on the local self-government level (care about consumer protection at a local level).    Ministry of Economy, with its Unit of Consumer Protection (directly responsible for the implementation of the consumer protection policy, proposes consumer protection programme, takes measures and activities related to the implementation of consumer policy, and harmonises the legislation with the consumer needs);   State Market Inspectorate, within the Ministry of Economy (control over the implementation of the Consumer Protection Law, assessment of products' and services’ quality, protection of consumer economic interests);   The Courts – in case the consumers initiate procedure; Besides the Ministry of Economy, the following institutions also have responsibilities for consumer protection: Ministry of Health (State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate and the Bureau of Medicines), Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy (Veterinary Directorate  – State Veterinary Inspectorate and the State Agricultural Inspectorate, the Plants Protection Directorate), Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning (State Environment Inspectorate), Ministry of Transport and Communications (Telecommunications Directorate), Ombudsman, Commission for Protection of Competition, Broadcasting Council, Institute for Standardization, Institute for Accreditation  etc. The introduction of the second sector in the consumer protection domain is regulated by the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), which in Section VII, Article 2 regulates the rights and obligations of the associations of citizens, established in accordance with the Law on associations of citizens and foundations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 31/98), in the filed of consumer protection.  The provisions of the Consumer Protection Law (Article 128) provide an array of opportunities for involvement of non-governmental organizations in the consumer policy creation, and in the citizens/consumers information, education and counselling. 
3. It should be specified whether there are bodies within the public administration which are competent for: a) General co-ordination of consumer affairs: is general competence on consumer policy allocated to one designated authority, which is responsible for taking initiatives and for coordinating actions in the consumer area? b) Market surveillance / general product safety: are there independent administrative structures and enforcement powers monitoring the market for consumer goods, in order to detect breaches of product safety rules and to ensure they are corrected? This would include dealing with consumer complaints and infringement of rules. [Specific questions on product safety and market surveillance are to be found in section C. below.] c) Market surveillance / protection of economic interests of consumers: are there independent administrative structures and enforcement powers monitoring the market for consumer goods and services, in order to detect breaches of rules protecting the economic interests of consumers and to ensure they are corrected? This would include dealing with consumer complaints and infringement of rules. [See also section D. below.] Information should outline mandate, responsibilities and powers (e.g. of investigation, to seize the courts, etc.), as well as structure and organisation of the services in charge of consumer policy, including links between central, regional and local level. Human and financial resources allocated to each sector should be indicated. Explanations should be provided on how co-ordination between competent authorities is ensured. 

a) The Ministry of Economy is the designated competent body for the implementation of the consumer protection policy; it performs the task of general coordination and is responsible for the actual implementation of the consumer protection policy. The Ministry of Economy takes initiatives and actions in the consumer protection area in accordance with the Consumer Protection Programme and by its own initiative, within its legal scope. The implementation of these activities of the Ministry of Economy is done through the Unit for Consumer Protection. b)  
In the Republic of Macedonia, the monitoring of the market for consumer goods and the detection of breaches of product safety rules are enforced by: State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, Bureau of Medicines, State Agricultural Inspectorate, State Veterinary Inspectorate - Veterinary Directorate and the State Environment Inspectorate.  The competencies of the State Market Inspectorate also include supervision of the general safety of the products on the market. State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, within the consumer protection function, in accordance with its competencies that are further established by specific regulations, performs inspectoral supervision of the enforcement of the laws and regulations regarding the production and sales of: food and food related products and materials, tobacco products, i.e. permissible levels of tar and nicotine, labelling, advertising and warning measures; toys; personal hygiene products, facial and body care products and their packaging; products which come in direct contact with the skin or mucous membranes during their use; narcotics, precursors and poisons . The State Sanitary and Health Inspector, within its competencies, in cases of detected deficiencies, it is authorised to take measures which include: issuing orders for correction of the found deficiencies; banning the production, circulation or importation of products, issuing orders for faulty products disposal, etc.  The Food Directorate has been established as a body within the Ministry of Health. The Directorate officially started its work from 01.01.2005. All of the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate's competencies pertaining to food safety, food related materials and products will be transferred to the Food Directorate. This would provide a new quality of the supervision, which will include import, export, food production and circulation, food related products and materials, and also provide for a greater consumer safety and protection regarding deceptions related to product quality, their production, date of expiry, etc.  In 2003, the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia has funded the activities under the jurisdiction of the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate with 1.540.000 MKD for material expenses.  A total of 42.000.000 MKD has been approved from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia for funding the start of the Food Directorate activities from 01.01.2005. The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate is a part of the Ministry of Health. It consists of 17 regional branches and 1 Border Surveillance Unit which has jurisdiction over the country’s border crossings. The Inspectorate is managed by a Director. The State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate employs a total of 95 inspectors. The State Sanitary and Health inspectors in the regional branches are employed as advisor inspectors and are accountable to the Director, to the Head of Sector, and to the Head of the Unit. By vocation, the advisor inspectors are medical doctors, or specialist medical doctors in preventive medical branches, their responsibilities are distributed by geographic areas, and they are competent for inspection of food, water, contagious diseases, cosmetics, poisons, hospital hygiene, radiation safety, toys, tobacco and tobacco products, air pollution, and noise. The Professional Operations Sector administers the regional branches. The Sector also includes a Border Surveillance Unit. The Border Surveillance Unit supervises the safety of imported goods, more specifically: food, toys, tobacco and tobacco products, items for general use, poisons, radioactive substances and passengers in international traffic. Border surveillance is conducted through 11 regional centres in the Republic of Macedonia, with activities performed on customs terminals and border crossings. 17 inspectors are responsible for the border surveillance. 
Bureau of Medicines, being a part of the Ministry of Health, in accordance with the Law on Organisation and Work of the State Administration Bodies (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 58/00 and 44/02) monitors the market of drugs consumption, additional medical products , and medical devices for detection of breaches of the rules for safe, secure and efficient drugs. The Bureau of Medicines, within its competencies, performs a direct control and supervision of the enforcement of the laws and regulations concerning production, supply and circulation of: drugs, additional medical products and medical devices, takes measures for improvement of conditions, monitors the conditions of supply, production, and circulation of poisons and of their use, monitors the conditions of production, circulation and use of narcotics, participates in the preparation of laws, secondary legislation, programmes, reports, analyses, opinions within the scope of its work, cooperates with other state administration bodies, issues permits for import of drugs, additional medical products and medical devices, issues permits for narcotics and psychotropic substances export and import, issues licenses for retail (pharmacies) and gross sales of drugs, additional medical products and medical devices, issues licenses for production of drugs, additional medical products medical devices, and narcotics. Professional operations include managing of procedures for putting drugs, additional medicines and medical instruments, narcotics, and poisons into circulation. It also cooperates with international institutions in the area of international control of narcotics, psychotropic substances, and precursors.  Professional advisory bodies: The Minister of Health appoints the Drugs Registration, Additional Medicines Registration, and Medical Instruments Registration Commissions. The professional operations bodies (National Laboratory for Drug Control, Centre for Pharmaceutical Information, Centre for Monitoring Undesirable Medicine Side Effects) function as separate institutions at the moment, upon individual authorisations for executing certain activities issued by the Ministry of Health - the Minister.  Within the inspection supervision (regular, extraordinary or special supervision), Bureau of Medicines, through its inspectors, in accordance with its authorisations, undertakes measures against the determined deficiencies which include: issuing orders for correction of determined deficiencies; banning of production or circulation of drugs, additional medical products and medical devices; banning the use of curative substances; stopping clinical drug testing if the pre-conditions prescribed by law are not met; banning the circulation of drugs, additional medical products and medical devices, i.e. certain production series; suggesting withdrawal of drugs, additional medical products and medical devices from circulation; confiscating drugs, additional medical products medical devices, issuing orders for disposal of faulty products, taking and sending samples of drugs, additional medical products and medical devices for laboratory testing in authorised control laboratory. The Bureau of Medicines, being a part of the Ministry of Health, according to the organisational structure of the Ministry, consists of the following departments:   Unit for Medical Procurement of Drugs, Additional Medical Products, Narcotics and Poisons    Unit for Administrative Affairs;   Unit for Inspection Supervision ;   At present, the Bureau of Medicines employs 10 civil servants and a Director. In 2003, the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia funded the activities under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Medicines with 3.064.000 MKD for salaries. 
The State Agricultural Inspectorate performs: 
  supervision of the circulation of plants, products, materials and tools, and other tasks determined by law in the area of agriculture during import, export, re-export and transit across the state border;    survey and control of: agricultural land, agricultural crops and plantations; the breeding and other stock documentation; the premises for processing and finishing agricultural products; the equipment for the same; all the phases of processing and finishing to the final product; the premises for keeping and maintaining agricultural products; the green and cattle markets; the agricultural technical equipment; the way of packaging, labelling and marking; the quality and composition of products; keeping, usage of protection equipment; the prohibition of use and prohibition of use for work; the health properties of products;   supervision of the total quantities of products from the organic production; of the products of vegetable origin put in circulation and within the scope of the certificates issued by authorised legal entities and institutions; as well as of putting into circulation agricultural production causing harmful effects on people, vegetation and live stock; of visible price list on the products in the market;   supervision of seeds, seedlings and propagating material put into circulation, if their labels are misguiding for the consumers. The State Agricultural Inspectorate is part of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, and it consists of the following 2 units: Agricultural Inspection Unit and Plants Protection Unit, with the main office at the Ministry, and branch offices in 33 regional branches. The State Agricultural Inspectorate is managed by a Director, and it employs 27 state inspectors.  It is financed from the Budget, through the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy. In 2003, the Inspectorate spent a total of 9.152.064 MKD for salaries and contributions, but there is no specific data on the material expenses. The State Veterinary Inspection, which is a part of the Veterinary Directorate , performs an obligatory veterinary sanitary control and inspection of animals, animal breeding facilities; of animals at fairs, markets, exhibitions, sporting events and other public selling places; of the equipment for production, processing, and finishing; of production and circulation of products, raw materials and waste of animal origin, shops and other places of business selling products of animal origin; of cattle feed; of water used for production and watering of animals; of production of semen for artificial insemination, of ovules and embryos, and their circulation; of drugs for veterinary medicine, veterinary protection and improvement of the environment and nature; of the minimum compulsory health protection of animals against diseases. The State Veterinary Inspectorate takes and sends samples for laboratory testing in authorised diagnostics laboratory; performs medical examinations of products and raw materials of animal origin, as well as inspections for presence of harmful substances.  The veterinary inspectors perform the veterinary sanitary check-ups and inspections systematically and under previously determined annual programmes in continuity, or on a daily basis, or upon personal initiative, or by consumers report.  The Veterinary Directorate provides guidelines for crisis management in accordance with the Law on Veterinary Health (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/98) in cases of crisis occurrence. Shipments of animals, products, raw materials and waste of animal origin, shipments containing animal origin ingredients, semen for artificial insemination, fertilised ovules and embryos, cattle feed, and other items that can carry communicable diseases during import, export or transit, are subject to veterinary sanitary check-ups and control in the cross border traffic. The State Veterinary Inspectorate is a part of the Veterinary Directorate of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy. The Veterinary Directorate is managed by a Director, and it employs a total of 73 employees, out of which 12 in the main office. The Head of the Unit manages the State Veterinary Inspectorate, and the organisation includes the Unit for Veterinary Inspection on the border crossings with 10 veterinary inspectors and 1 technician on 9 border crossings, as well as the Veterinary Inspection in the internal organisational units with 41 veterinary inspectors and 9 technicians in 21 internal organisational units.  Except for the funds from the common budget of the Ministry for Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, which are used for salaries and contributions for the employees, the Veterinary Directorate was allocated 187.000.000 MKD from the 2003 Budget, and 276.150.000 MKD from the 2004 Budget to finance its own activities. 
The State Environment Inspectorate, in accordance with the Law on Environment and Nature Protection and Promotion (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 13/03 (revised text)), within its competencies, supervises the application of the technical and technological measures for air and water protection against pollution, supervises the protected natural resources, and the measures for protection of the soil against degradation and pollution. In accordance with the Draft Law on Environment, which is currently in a Parliamentary procedure, during the supervision, and within the scope of activity, an Environmental Inspector has the right to:    determine whether there is production, putting in circulation and usage of certain products and substances prohibited for use because of its negative impact on environment, or to determine the performance of activities and services prohibited for the same reasons;   determine whether imported technologies, products, semi-products and raw materials which are imported, are banned in the country of origin or the country that exports them for environmental reasons;   determine whether domestic or imported technology, product, semi-product, or raw material that do not fulfil the prescribed norms for environmental protection are used;   determine whether products, semi-products, or raw materials which are not labelled properly for pollution or harmful effects on environment are put into circulation;   determine if there is sale of dangerous chemical substances or products in packages that are not solid, complete or adequate;   determine if there is advertising, labelling and putting into circulation of products labelled with environmental marks which is not in accordance with the procedures and criteria stipulated in this Law or a regulation adopted on the basis of this Law. The State Environment Inspectorate employs 9 persons (a Director, and 8 environmental inspectors, 4 of them appointed and authorised for the cities of Veles, Bitola, Strumica and Gostivar).  In 2003, the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia funded the activities under the jurisdiction of the State Environment Inspectorate with 8.000.000 MKD. According to the functional analysis and the Development Plan of the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, the resources of the State Environment Inspectorate shall be enlarged, and the number of inspectors shall be increased to 22.  The obligation for coordinating the activities between the aforementioned inspection bodies and the other institutions and bodies is stipulated by the Law on Organisation and Work of the State Administration  Bodies (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 58/00, 44/02). In accordance with the European Partnership Action Plan for 2005, the following activities are planned:    Establishing and developing an efficient system for market surveillance;   Establishment of a coordination body for the market surveillance activities;   Preparation of an analysis of the current market surveillance system and a restructuring plan.   Training of entities included in the market surveillance system; and   Joining RAPEX and RASFF. c) The State Market Inspectorate, regarding the protection of economic interests of consumers, performs the market surveillance of goods and services in order to detect violations that harm the economic interests of consumers. According to the Law on State Market Inspectorate (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 35/97, 23/99, 7/02, 20/02), the State Market Inspectorate monitors: the sales of goods and services, the prices of products and services in production and circulation, the quality of products and services in production and circulation  prescribed by standards and regulations, the control of measure units and measuring devices usage in the sales of goods and services, the circulation of goods and services with foreign countries and foreign trade, the sales of valuable metal products, the protection of service marks and trademarks, labels and codes, the quality labels and appellation origin on products, the provision of services, the consumer protection, the catering and tourism industries, the artisanship, and other matters stipulated by law. Consumers file claims and complaints about purchased products or services through the State Market Inspectorate in writing, or orally, on the free phone 080011333 which covers the territory of the whole country. The claims and complaints usually relate to putting in circulation of products with expired validity, or to products without declaration or instructions for use written in Macedonian language and its Cyrillic alphabet, or to replacement of mobile phones, electric appliances, shoes, textile products, performed reparation services, etc. After the submitting of claims or complaints by the consumers or by the Macedonian Consumer Organisation, the State Market Inspectors acting upon, determine  the actual facts, and in compliance with the Consumer Protection Law in 2004 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01issue  Decisions which order traders to substitute products, or their servicing in order to eliminate the established flaws, or to reduce the price of the faulty product accordingly, etc.  The authority of the State Market Inspectors regarding the inspection supervision and proceedings are stipulated in the Law on Market Inspection and other legislation. The State Market Inspectorate performs its legally determined activities on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia on central level organised as a single Sector with 5 regional units in the following cities: Skopje, Bitola, Ohrid, Strumica and Stip. The State Market Inspectorate employs 153 state market inspectors with university degrees. In 2004, the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia has funded the activities under the jurisdiction of the State Market Inspectorate with 54.477.230 MKD for salaries, and 2.500.000 MKD for goods and services. The State Market Inspectorate has also made some other expenses for goods and services which are incorporated in the budget of the Ministry of Economy. For 2005, the State Market Inspectorate has planned to spend 66.612.000 MKD for salaries and contributions, and 20.000.000 MKD for goods and services and capital expenses. Within its competencies determined by law, the State Market Inspectorate regularly coordinates its activities with equal or similar bodies competent for market surveillance, such as the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate, the Veterinary Directorate, the State Labour Inspectorate, the Public Revenue Office, and other bodies and institutions. The obligation for coordinating the activities of the State Market Inspectorate with the other institutions and bodies is stipulated by the Law on Organisation and Work of the Civil Administration Bodies. The inspectors survey and conduct the procedures mainly in accordance with the Law on Market Inspection and the Law on General Administrative Procedure (“Official Gazette of SFRJ” No. 52/56, 10/65, 18/65, 32/78, 47/86, 16/86, 4/77, 11/78, 9/86 and “Official Gazette of RM” No. 44/02), stipulating, inter alia, that all administrative authorities have the obligation to inform the citizens of the outcome of their claims and complaints. The State Market Inspector, in accordance with the Consumer Protection Law, has the right to issue administrative orders upon certain activities, to temporarily seize products, and is bound to initiate misdemeanour court proceedings for activities that are determined to be misdemeanour. Under the Law on Courts (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 36/95, 45/95 and 64/03), the first instance courts in the Republic of Macedonia are authorised to rule decisions for confiscating the temporary confiscated and seized products dangerous to the health and the environment, in accordance with the provisions of the Law on Executive Procedure (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 53/97, 59/00, and 64/03). 
4. Have consultation structures or procedures been established in order to allow consumer interests to be represented in discussions on consumer policy, when drafting and implementing legislation? 
The Consumer Protection Council within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, in compliance with the authorities granted by the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, with regard to initiatives and proposals for changing and amending the legislation in the area of consumer protection, brings forth its own proposals and opinions, takes part in discussions and delivers opinions during the adoption of the laws, raises initiatives for amending and appending the legislation in the area of consumer protection, etc. During the creation of consumer protection policy, and drafting and implementing laws, Consumers' Associations have a significant role, i.e. they submit initiatives and deliver opinions to competent bodies for regulating certain issues in the area of consumer protection policy. In addition, they have the right to consider the consumer’s complaints and to consult their members for legal inquiries concerning the legislation applicable to consumer protection and exercising of consumer rights. The adoption and the implementation of the Consumer Protection Law will provide for the consumers' interests to be included in the creation of the consumer protection policy by inclusion of members of the Consumers' Associations in the Council for Consumer Protection in order to establish a higher level of consumer protection and clear and efficient legal system supported by institutions that will work on the exercise of consumer interests. The efforts aimed at inclusion and representation of consumer views and opinions have started to effectuate in certain bodies on the level of line ministries, where the Macedonian Consumer Organisation and other non-governmental organisations are represented. Those bodies include: the Codex Alimentarius Commission, the National Food and Diet Committee, the Committee for Iodine Deficiency of the Republic of Macedonia, the Committee for Fight Against Smoking, the Broadcasting Council, the Committee for Environmental Labelling, and others. 
5. Access to justice: which measures are in place, if any, to facilitate consumers’ access to justice through the courts to seek individual redress? Are there measures to simplify and speed up small claims litigation? Do out-of-court bodies exist which provide alternative dispute resolution systems (e.g. mediation or conciliation systems)? 
There are no specific provisions on measures and procedures relating exclusively to consumers in the Law on Civil Procedure (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 33/98 and 44/02), which would facilitate their access to courts for seeking individual redress. However, this Law provides for initiation of simplified litigation suits for small scale claims that do not exceed the amount of 30.000 MKD. Litigations that include non-monetary claims, where the plaintiff agrees to accept a monetary compensation not exceeding the amount of 30.000 MKD, also fall into the category of small scale claims. Likewise, litigations that include non-monetary claims, where the plaintiff does not demand a reimbursement, but compensation in a form of a movable object with a value of less than 30.000 MKD, also fall into the category of small scale claims.  In principle, the general rules of the Law on Civil Procedure apply to the small scale claims litigations, unless there are specific provisions that determine the court proceedings differently. The provisions for small scale claims litigations usually provide for quicker court proceedings and resolution of litigants’ claims. The proceedings for small scale claims litigations allow for appeals only against the decision for proceedings termination, and the verdict or decision for  proceedings termination may be rebutted only on the grounds of serious violations of the provisions on litigation procedures referred to in Article 340, paragraph 2 and wrongful application of substantive law.  The new Law on Civil Procedure, which is in the Parliamentary procedure, with its Articles 433 and 434 determines that the provisions for preparatory hearing do not apply for small scale claims litigations. If the plaintiff does not appear in court for the first, or any other hearing, and they have been properly summoned, the lawsuit will be deemed to be withdrawn, unless the defendant has been engaged in a discussion at that particular hearing. In the summon for the main hearing, the disclaimers warn that if the plaintiff fails to appear at court at any of the hearings, the lawsuit will be deemed to be withdrawn; that the litigants are obliged to present all the facts and evidence during the first appearance at court, at the main hearing; and that the decision may be rebutted only on the grounds of serious violations of the provisions on litigation procedures, and wrongful application of substantive law.  The verdict from the proceedings in the small scale claims litigations is proclaimed right after the conclusion of the main hearing. The Law on Courts (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 36/95, 45/95 and 64/03) allows for equal access to justice to all citizens and forbids bringing decisions that do not comply with the legal provisions and regulations.  In principle, every citizen has the right to demand compensation through a litigation procedure, in accordance with the Law on Obligations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/01, 4/02, and 5/03) and the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, in case the citizen could not exercise his/her right through the authorised inspection bodies. However, the basic rights of consumers relating to advertising, requests for ban cancellation and illegal advertising, protection from unsafe products, putting into circulation of unsafe toys, putting defective products into circulation and their rights relating to incompatibility, elimination of flaws during the warranty period, revision of prices, as well as substitution with other products, are regulated with the consumer right for claims to the competent State Market Inspectorate and to the other aforementioned inspection services for administrative procedure, which does not exclude the possibility for filing compensation claims before a competent court. On the basis of the Consumer Protection Law, consumers' associations help the consumers, or a limited number of consumers, with filing lawsuits before competent courts for protection of their rights. Consumers' associations may intermediate in consumer disputes between traders and consumers relating to bought products or services. There are still no out-of-court bodies in the Republic of Macedonia to allow for alternative dispute resolution. There is a plan for adoption a Law on Mediation, which would include out-of-court dispute resolution, regulating cases and different forms of mediation and conciliation and arbitrary dispute resolution, as well as the legal consequences of the acts and decisions brought during such out-of-court proceedings. This law will be adopted in 3 years time.  
6. Has the government drawn up any education, information and awareness-raising programme on consumer issues, which would help consumers be aware of their rights and able to exercise them? 
Article 129 of the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01stipulates inclusion of basic knowledge about consumer obligations, rights and protection in the preschool institution programmes, and school programmes for the primary and secondary education.  The primary and secondary schools implement the experimental “Youth Economic Education” programme. This programme has been implemented since the academic year 1997/1998 as a complementary programme in 24 schools with 28 groups from 1st to 8th grade, and in 16 secondary schools with 17 groups. There is a constant interest in a greater inclusion of students in this programme by extending the number of participating primary and secondary schools. For the purpose of this programme implementation, modern educational and teaching tools and expendable materials were provided for every school, and training seminars were organised for the teaching staff. Similar to that, consumer protection contents is included in the vocational education, within the optional subject Business and Economics in the new curricula for the reformed educational profiles (Economic Assistant, Business Secretary, and Trade and Marketing Assistant) in the economic, law and trade professions. On the level of University education, the Faculty of Economics has included issues related to the consumer behaviour and protection in the subject programme of the Basis of Marketing studies since 1970, and the Marketing Department, with the acceptance of the ECTS (European Credit Transfer System) programme in the academic 1998/99, studies this subject matter within the subject program of Consumer Behaviour.  At the same time, some activities related to the education of the teaching staff in the domain of consumer protection have been implemented. For example, the Promotion of Consumer Protection in the Republic of Macedonia Programme was carried out through the German Association for Technical Cooperation (GTZ). During the school year 2002, the Macedonian Consumer Organisation, supported by the international consumer protection organisation Consumers International and the Federation of German Consumer Organisations, in cooperation with the Ministry of Education and Science, completed the following activities:   An Expert study on the possibilities for inclusion of topics on protection of the rights of the children as consumers in the teaching programmes in the preschool and primary education was prepared.        A Forum was organised, on the Possibilities for Consumer Education in the Educational System. The basic goal of this forum was building a Strategy for Education of Youth as Consumers.          A workshop was organised, on the Concept Development for Implementation of Consumer Education in the Macedonian Educational System, with the aim to consider the possibilities for developing a common concept for consumer education by all the relevant factors. Within this project, with the financial aid of Consumers International, picture books for preschool children and a brochure for primary school students were published; and preparations have started for publishing of a Teacher’s Handbook with Teaching-technical Aids for the needs of the teachers. 
7. Do non-governmental organisations representing consumer interests exist in your country? If so, please describe their situation: how many are there? When were they created? How is their membership composed? Are they representative of consumer interests at national level? Is the government promoting and assisting their development? What are their objectives? Which kind of activities do they carry out? What are their main sources of financing? How many staff do they employ? 
Two non-governmental organizations representing the consumer interests have been registered in the Republic of Macedonia, namely the Macedonian Consumer Organisation  and the Club of Associations of Citizens - Consumers.  At the moment, the Macedonian Consumer Organisation in Skopje is more active, and it has been recognised internationally as a full member of Consumers International and a member of BEUC – the European Consumers’ Organisation. This organisation has been established in accordance  with the Law on Associations of Citizens and Foundations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 31/98)  This Organisation is active in the following fields:    Taking initiatives aimed at improving the legislation in the Republic of Macedonia in the area of consumer protection;    Raising public awareness through education, information, counselling, and representing consumer interests;    Representing consumer interests on local, national and international level and supporting the development of institutions and mechanisms for consumers’ protection;  The Macedonian Consumer Organisation is organised to work through a Head Office and a network of branches and Counselling Bureaus for the consumers. There are Counselling Bureaus in the cities of Skopje, Bitola, Tetovo, Stip and Ohrid. This structure allows for gradual expansion of activities through the whole territory of the Republic of Macedonia, with the aim to help the consumers through their education and with regard to their rights exercising.  The Programme of the Macedonian Consumer Organisation follows the guidelines of the workgroups in the following domains:    Improving the legislation;   Diet;   Housing and residence;   Energy;   Medical patients' rights;   Protection of children as consumers; and   Financial services. Within these areas, a great number of seminars, round tables, individual researches and media presentations are constantly held with the aim to inform the public about the relevant problems of the citizens. The organisation publishes its own bulletin “Потрошувач” (Consumer) and a number of educational brochures, and has also organised information systems, so called “Infoteques”, in the legal, diet, housing, health, and financial services areas, as well as an infoteque in the area of household appliances with tables containing comparative tests of these products. The Macedonian Consumer Organisation played an important role in the promotion of the UN Guidelines for Consumer Protection on the national level, especially during the lobbying for the preparation and adoption of the first Consumer Protection Law in July 2000, and at the same time actively participated in the preparations for the new Consumer Protection Law in 2004.  The Macedonian Consumer Organisation is financed through foreign projects and from the budgetary funds intended for citizens’ associations. The Macedonian Consumer Organisation has implemented a GTZ project for assisting the organisation of consumers in Macedonia in the period 1998 - 2005, on the basis of a bilateral agreement between the German and the Macedonian Government through which an intensive cooperation with the Federation of German Consumer Organisations in Berlin (VZBV) has taken place in terms of gathering knowledge and new experiences with the aim of transferring and adapting them to our specific circumstances and improving the customers' situation. The project has been implemented within the framework of the Economic and Social Development Programme, and the holder of the project is the Ministry of Economy. The aim of the project is to establish a functional system of consumers' interests protection in the Republic of Macedonia. The project will end in 2005, and the Ministry of Economy has applied for a new GTZ project and for support from the CARDS Programme, which was approved during the consultative negotiations. The Macedonian Consumer Organisation will participate in the implementation of the goals and activities in cooperation with the line ministries, the institutions, and the competent inspection services. The Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01, provides for allocation of funds for information, counselling and education of consumers through a Consumer Protection Programme, and these activities will be implemented through non-governmental organisations for consumer protection, enjoying credibility, national character and international recognition. The Macedonian Consumer Organisation employs seven full time employees. The number of part time associates, which are engaged when needed, is over 15. Apart from these two non-governmental organizations, there are also other citizens' associations in the Republic of Macedonia that indirectly protect the consumer interests, namely, the Macedonian marketing association "Marketing” in Skopje, all the environmental associations, etc. 
8. Have you developed any relations with other countries on consumer protection issues (e.g. cross-border co-operation activities, exchange of information and best practices, etc.)? 
The Republic of Macedonia has started establishing contacts in the area of consumer protection with other countries (Albania, Germany, France, Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Slovenia). There are plans to expand this cooperation with other countries, especially with the countries from the region. The Macedonian Consumer Organisation, as a full member of Consumers International – the International Consumers Organisation, and a member of BEUC – the European Consumers' Organisation, maintains contacts and carries out project activities with consumer organisations in other countries (VZBV in Germany, Consumentenbond in the Netherlands, the National British Consumers Council, Consumers Association UK, the Slovenian consumers organisation “Zveza potrosnikov Slovenije”, the Consumers Defence Association of the Czech Republic – SOS), as well as with the consumer organisations in the region (in Albania, Romania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Serbia, and Montenegro). 