INTERESTS OF CONSUMERS 

9. If public authorities exist to protect the economic interests of consumers, please specify the powers at their disposal and give some examples of activities carried out. 
Within its competencies, pursuant to the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/04), see 23_Annex_01., the State Market Inspectorate also acts on issues regarding the protection of the economic interests of the consumers. If the inspector, in the course of supervision, determines that:   upon the request of the consumer, the trader does not return the amount paid for the purchased product that was returned;   the trader makes the purchase of a particular product subject to purchase of other products or in other way conditions the purchase and sale of products;   the trader does not give to the consumer the reward without delay, when such reward has been promised to the consumer in case of purchasing the product or providing the service;   the trader, when selling bulk products, does not pack them in an appropriate packaging;   the trader does not satisfy the consumer’s request when the customer is sold a defective product.  When the consumer's request is not satisfied, and the fault is discovered within the warranty period of products for which warranties are provided or within 6 months for products with no warranty, and the trader does not prove that the faults of the product have been caused by infringement of the rules for safe keeping by the consumer or third persons, the consumer has the right to request, by their own choice:   free of charge removal of the defects of the product or reimbursement of the expenses for removal of the defect;   proportional reduction of the retail price;    replacement of the product with appropriate product with the same trademark, type, industrial design or designation of origin and geographical destination of the product;   replacement of the product with appropriate product with different trademark, type, industrial design or designation of origin and geographical destination of the product, with appropriate reduction or increase of the retail price; and   Cancellation of the contract, return of the paid amount and compensation for the suffered damages. If the consumers do not exercise their right with the trader, they submit a claim to the State Market Inspectorate directly, or through the Macedonia Consumers Organisation. State Market Inspectorate, after an inspection surveillance procedure, and in case they determine an infringement of the legal provisions, brings a Decision that orders and determines a period for removal of the defects; and in case the determined defects are not removed in the prescribed period, it will decide upon a ban on carrying out business activities for 30 days. If for a second time during the same year it is determined that the trader did not comply with the decision, the inspector will bring a Decision for banning of carrying out business activities for 90 days. The brought decisions may be appealed, but the appeal does not postpone the execution of the Decision. The Law also provides penalties for the infringement of the legal provisions; the State Market Inspectorate files a misdemeanour charge with the competent court. The consumer’s claims usually relate to complaints on products about the quality, e.g. of mobile phones, electric household appliances or services provided, and usually they are settled with the replacement of the products. Example: 1. The customer complains: the purchased TV set did not function right after the purchase.   Actions taken by the inspector:   After the establishment of the defect, and confirmation of the consumer’s claim, the amount for the purchased product is reimbursed. 2. The customer complains: The purchased product, a mobile phone, has technical faults that make it dysfunctional.   Actions taken by the inspector:    The consumer’s claims are confirmed, and the product is replaced by a new one. 3. The customer complains: The electrical stove does not function.   Actions taken by the inspector:   The consumer’s claims are confirmed, and the product’s defect is removed. The consumer’s claims are confirmed, and the complete amount for the purchased product is reimbursed. 
10. Please provide details on enforcement of legislation in the area of financial services, in particular on consumer credit. 
The protection of users of certain financial services is provided on the basis of the Law on Deposits Insurance Fund (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 63/00, 29/02, 43/02, 49/03, and 66/03), the Banking Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 63/00, 51/03, and 85/03), the Law on Supervision of Insurance (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 27/02), the Law on Leasing (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 4/02 and 49/03), the Law on Fast Money Transfer (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 77/03 and 2/04), the Law on Contractual Pledge (Official Gazette of RM No 05/03) (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 5/03), and others. More details about the Deposit Insurance Fund are given in the answer to question II. Financial services, A. Banking sector, General questions, 3. Legal framework - Conditions for collaboration, under No. 10 from Chapter 3 – Free movement of services, (for more details see 03_II_A_3_10). Pursuant to the Law on Deposits Insurance Fund, a total of 102.640.177.50 MKD (approx. 1,6 million Euros) were paid off for the insured deposits by 10 October 2004, from the total sum of 109.281.083.50 MKD (approx. 1,8 million Euros) that are supposed to be paid off by the Fund for Deponents - Natural Persons from banks and savings banks with revoked founding and operating licenses. The unpaid sum is due to the natural persons' failure to claim their funds. The Banking Law regulates especially the protection of the savings deposits. A business bank is obliged to determine the ways and conditions for accepting and withdrawing savings deposits in its acts, and to display on a noticeable place in the teller's premises copies from the National Bank’s Governor decision for granting of a founding and operating license, the interest rates in effect, the general terms of handling the savings deposits, and the type and amount of guarantee for the savings deposits. If the bank fails to issue a special document – a savings book for the denar and foreign exchange savings deposits to the natural persons, the National Bank takes a decision on revoking the part of the license regarding acceptance of savings deposits.  The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia permanently controls the operation of the banks and their adherence to the legal obligations and supervision standards, and takes measures against banks which do not adhere to them.  The National Bank, within the regular supervision of the banks’ operations, undertakes measures to prohibit the acceptance of savings deposits against the banks which have endangered the timely implementation of commitments towards the creditors (deponents) of the bank. Thus, in 2000, one bank was prohibited to perform financial activities for a given period; in 2001 the measure for prohibiting of acceptance of savings deposits was undertaken against one bank; and in 2002 this measure was undertaken against two banks, while one bank was prohibited to accept new or prolong the existing deposits of natural persons. For not adhering to the provisions of the law regarding the protection of the depositors, the Banking Law provides the following penalties:   An employee of the bank who, exercising their duties, with premeditation does not issue a savings book or other appropriate document, depending on the kind of the deposit, shall be sentenced to three to five years of imprisonment;   Also, the bank shall be fined for infraction with the sum of 100.000 to 300.000 MKD, and the Executive Body of the bank and other persons with special rights and responsibilities in a bank shall be fined with the sum of 10.000 to 50.000 MKD, and shall be prohibited from performing executive duties in a bank for a period of one year if: a) they fail to issue a savings book to natural persons; and b) do not publicly display the conditions for operating with savings deposits in the teller’s premises.  The protection of insurance services users is regulated by Article 50, paragraph 1, point 7 of the Law on Supervision of Insurance, which stipulates that the insurance brokerage shall, when concluding the insurance contract, notify in writing the person on the right to lodge a complaint with reference to insurance undertakings and insurance brokerages with the Ministry of Finance. No complaints have been lodged with the Ministry of Finance since the Law has entered into force (April 2002).  The credits in general, including consumer credits, as well as the credits on the basis of lien on securities, are regulated by the provisions of the Law on Obligations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/01, 3/02, and 5/03). The security of loan and credit agreements is regulated by the Law on Contractual Pledge (Official Gazette of RM No 05/03). Banking financial deposit, banking current accounts, safe agreements, and banking guarantees are regulated by the Law on Obligations (Article 1127 of the Law on Obligations stipulates that the provisions of Articles 1074 to 1126 are suitably applied to legal persons other than banks, if they are authorised for performing certain banking operations).  Non-purpose credits are credits for which the approval is not conditioned with submitting special documents for proving and establishing the purpose of the credit, and they are used in cash. Our banks offer: cash credits; cash credits with a pledge on foreign exchange savings deposit; cash credits with a pledge on bonds issued by the Republic of Macedonia, on the basis of a foreign currency savings deposit.  Purpose credits are: housing credits, credits for business premises and office equipment; passenger vehicles credits and credits for other purposes. The eligibility for these credits is conditioned with certain formalities. The bank, with the contracts, always retains the right to change the interest rates according to the internal Bank Ordinance on Interest Rates. The banks in the Republic of Macedonia conclude contracts with certain traders for crediting the products bought from their shops.  Most of the banks and savings banks grant credits with liens on citizens’ cheques or other securities.  With the contract for a credit on the basis of lien on securities the banks approves credits with defined amount through securing a lien with securities belonging to the user of the credit or to a third person that agrees on that. If the user does not return the granted credit after due for payment, the bank may sell the liened securities. Cash non-purpose credits are also the credits granted on the basis of lien on foreign exchange savings deposit.  Banks also grant cash non-purpose credits on the basis of lien on bonds issued by the Republic of Macedonia on the basis of foreign exchange savings deposits. The banks determine the amount of the individual credit on the basis of the average market price of the bonds in the previous month. The time limit for repayment of these credits is most often equal or less than the remainder of the time limit for repayment of the bonds. The right for using credits belongs to natural persons owning the state bonds, or to natural persons to whom the owners have transferred the ownership.  Housing credits are most often granted for the following purposes:   Buying newly constructed or old apartments from legal entities or natural persons;   Construction (new construction, completion of construction, extension of a building, thorough reconstruction) of family residential buildings.   Construction of apartments in residential buildings by joining funds.   Adaptation of apartments, or family residential buildings, for improvement of the functions and the standards in the apartment. The time limits for repayment extend to maximum of 10 years.  Banks also grant credits for buying passenger vehicles from car selling companies that have concluded special contracts with the bank. The amount of the credit is established on the basis of user's credibility. The maximum amount of the credit cannot be higher than the sum of the invoice minus the participation. For passenger vehicle credits a participation of 30% from the buyer is required. The time limit for repayment varies from 48 to 60 months. The interest rates on these credits are most often not higher than 20% per year. The banks consider natural persons credible if they can cover the monthly annuity of the granted credit with their free monthly net income. The market in the Republic of Macedonia also offers the service of financial leasing, which is regulated by the Law on Leasing. The service of financial leasing may be used by natural and legal entities alike. With regard to the function of rights protection of the users of the financial leasing service, the law stipulates that the leasing user, in case of leasing in which the Lesser selects the Supplier, i.e. the subject that provides the object that the user will use on the basis of the leasing contract, the Lessee may require cancellation of the leasing contract after previously informing, in written or electronic form, the Lesser, if the delay in the delivery of the object exceeds 30 days from the day the object from the leasing contract was to be delivered (Article 11, paragraph 3  of the Law on Leasing). In cases of acquiring leasing objects like these, the Lesser and the Supplier are held equally responsible against the Lessee for any damage with respect to the quality of the object of the leasing, the correctness of the operation, replacement or reparation of a defect and installation of the object (Article 7, paragraph 6 of the law). There are also penalty provisions for the persons not adhering to these obligations (Article 18 of the Law). The protection of rights of the users of financial leasing is also secured through the obligation of the Lesser to register the object of the leasing within five working days from the day of signing the leasing contract with the special register kept at the Central Registry of the Republic of Macedonia. Pursuant to the Law on Fast Money Transfer, the providers of the fast money transfer services charge a fee for the service upon a determined tariff. The service provider is obliged to display the tariff on a prominent place in the premises where the fast money transfer is conducted. 