L. JUDICIAL CO-OPERATION IN CIVIL AND CRIMINAL MATTERS 

1. Please provide information on legislation or other rules governing this area, and their adhesion to relevant international conventions. 
In the Republic of Macedonia, the procedure for providing legal assistance for fulfilling the obligations prescribed by international conventions for civil and criminal cases is regulated by national legislation, unless otherwise prescribed by international conventions.  Pursuant to Article 118 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, ratified international treaties are part of the national legislation and cannot be changed by domestic law. In accordance with Article 119 of the Constitution the President of the Republic of Macedonia concludes international conventions on behalf of the Republic of Macedonia. The Government of the Republic of Macedonia is also entitled to conclude international conventions in cases prescribed by law. Pursuant to the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04), international legal assistance in criminal cases is granted according to provisions of this Law unless otherwise regulated by the European Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters with Protocols, the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organised Crime and other international conventions ratified in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia. The aforementioned provisions apply when the country, submitting a request, has not ratified the European Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters with the Additional Protocol, or when there are no bilateral agreements between the two countries. The principle of reciprocity in criminal matters in the Republic of Macedonia is abandoned, but not excluded, so it means that in certain cases it can be applied pursuant to Article 505 of the Law on Criminal Procedure. Domestic courts may accept a request of a foreign authority for enforcing a criminal verdict of a foreign court, if it is stipulated with an international convention, if there is reciprocity and if the offence is also punishable in accordance with the Criminal Code of the Republic of Macedonia. Pursuant to Article 5 of the European Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters with the Additional Protocol (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No 32/29), the Republic of Macedonia retains the right to forward the request for enforcement of search or seizure of items. Therefore, in case when the request for legal assistance relates to a crime for which the law prohibits extradition, the rule of reciprocity applies. Pursuant to the Law on Criminal Procedure, the procedure for transferring convicted persons is pursued according to the provisions of this Law, unless otherwise regulated by the European Convention on Transfer of Convicts with Additional Protocol and other international conventions ratified in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia. In addition to the aforementioned European Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters with Additional Protocols, the following international conventions relating to this area are adhered to: the European Convention on Extradition with its Additional Protocol and the Second Additional Protocol; the European Convention on Transfer of Convicts with the Additional Protocol; the European Convention on Laundering, Search, Seizure and Confiscation of  Proceeds from Crime; the UN Convention against Corruption; the European Convention on Cyber Crime; the European Convention on Transfer of Proceedings in Criminal Matters; the United Nations Convention on Transnational Organised Crime with its Two Additional Protocols, as well as the Second Additional Protocol on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters.  The Law on Civil Procedure of the Republic of Macedonia contains general provisions regulating the procedures for mutual legal assistance in civil cases mostly in regard to court jurisdiction (Articles 165 to 169). Pursuant to this Law, courts shall provide legal assistance to foreign courts for cases regulated by international conventions and also when reciprocity in providing legal assistance is prescribed. In case it is not clear whether reciprocity exists, the Minister of Justice provides an explanatory note. However, the court shall refuse to provide legal assistance to a foreign court if it requests enforcement of an action which is contrary to the public order of the Republic of Macedonia. In such cases the competent court for providing legal assistance shall ex officio submit the case to the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia. The main act in this area is the Hague Convention on Civil Procedures from 1951 which is transposed into national legislation.  2. How are foreign judicial decisions recognised and enforced: a) in general civil and commercial matters? b) in criminal matters? 
a) Recognising foreign judicial decision in general civil and commercial matters  The issue of recognition and enforcement of foreign judicial decisions is incorporated in the positive legislation of the Republic of Macedonia through the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations (“Official Gazette of the SFRY”, No. 43/82), transposed into national regulation with the Article 5 from the Constitutional Law on Implementing the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia from 1991.  The Republic of Macedonia, since its independence, has concluded several agreements on legal assistance containing separate chapters regulating the matter of mutual recognition and enforcement of judicial decisions:    Agreement between Republic of Macedonia and Republic of Croatia on Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 19/95) – Articles 20 to 23;    Agreement between Republic of Macedonia and Republic of Slovenia on Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 24/96) - Articles 20 to 23;    Agreement between the Government og the Republic of Macedonia and the Council of Ministers of Republic of Albania on Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 16/98) - Articles 20 to 23;    Agreement on Legal Co-operation in Civil and Criminal Matters between Republic of Macedonia and Republic of Turkey (“Official Gazette of the Repubic of Macedonia” No. 23/97) - Articles 19 to 24;   Agreement between Republic of Macedonia and Ukraine on Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 48/2000) - Articles 45 to 51;    Agreement on Legal Assistance in Civil Matters between Republic of Macedonia and Republic of Bulgaria (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 13/2002) – Articles 20 to 23;    Agreement between Republic of Macedonia and Romania on Mutual Legal Assistance in Civil Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 41/2004) - Articles 23 to 31, which is ratified, but still has not entered in force;    Agreement between Republic of Macedonia and State Union of Serbia and Montenegro on Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Matters, signed in 2004, but still has not entered in force. The Republic of Macedonia, on the basis of succession, applies several agreements related to this area which were concluded by the former Socialist Federative Republic of Yugoslavia. Some of the agrrements, relate completely, and some partially to the recognition and enforcement of foreign judicial decisions. This area is regulated by separate chapters in agreements on legal assistance with Austria, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the Russian Federation (former USSR). With France, this area is regulated by a separate agreement, namely with the Convention on Recognition and Execution of Court Rulings in Civil and Trade Matters; with Greece with the Agreement on Mutual Recognition and Execution of Court Rulings; while with Austria and Belgium they refer only to court ruligns for maintenance (Agreement with Austria on Mutual Recognition and Execution of Court Rulings on Maintenance, and a Convention with Belgium on Recognition and Execution of Court Rulings on Maintenance).  Therefore, it is obvious that Republic of Macedonia has concluded agreements on legal assistance in civil and trade matters with many countries regulating the matter of recognition and enforcement of foreign court rulings. However, the competent bodies in the Republic of Macedonia, apart from the provisions of the relevant bilateral agreements, in certain relations also apply the provisions from the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations. In cases when provisions of this law and international agreements are applied, the international agreements always have priority. The Republic of Macedonia (by way of succession) is a Party to several multilateral conventions in this area: The United Nations Convention on Recovery Abroad of Maintenance from 20.05.1956 and the International Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage from 21.06.1963.  In 1994, the Republic of Macedonia joined the Convention on Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards from 1958, the Convention on Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards from 1927, the European Convention on Comercial Trade Arbitration from 1961, the Protocol for Arbitration Clauses from 1923, and applies all of them when recognising and enforcing arbitration decisions. In the international treaties where the Republic of Macedonia is a Contracting Party, the subject of recognition and enforcement may be judicial decisions in the area of civil and family law; judicial settlements; judicial decisions pronounced in the area of penal law pertaining to claims for compensation of damages caused by criminal acts and returning of objects; and judicial and arbitration decisions and settlements in economic (trade) cases. The Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations (Article 101, paragraph 2), and the international treaties, prescribe several preconditions that have to be cumulatively, and positively or negatively, fulfilled for the purpose of recognition of foreign judicial decision on the territory of Republic of Macedonia. Those are, mainly, the generally accepted conditions in the international private law. Namely: the foreign court should be competent for the matter in question; the judicial decision should be effective and in force; there should have been no irregularities in the procedure that could have caused inability to participate or non-participation of the person against whom the decision was brought; and the rules for delivery should not have been violated. Beside this, it is also important that provisions of the Law which protect the piblic order in the Republic of Macedonia were not violated, and in certain cases it is also important whether the current legislation of the Republic of Macedonia was applied while deciding upon certain legal relations. Existance of the reciprocity principle is also of a great significance in the recognition and enforcement of judicial decisions. When the recognition of foreign judicial decision is evaluated from the standpoint of domestic legal regime of reciprocity, the first and most important condition for the court is not to examine the rest of the conditions, but to reject the recognition automatically. On the other hand, when the recognition and enforcement is regulated by an agreement with the foreign country, the question of reciprocity does not arise because the existence of an international agreement by itself determines reciprocity  The court deciding upon the recognition of foreign judicial decisions determines whether the foreign court has been competent for the case from the standpoint of the international agreement, if such an agreement exists, i.e. on the basis of the legal provisions regulating the competencies of the Republic of Macedonia.  Pursuant to the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations, the foreign judicial decision shall not be recognised in the Republic of Macedonia if the exclusive competency for the subject matter belongs to a court or another body in the Republic of Macedonia (Article 89, paragraph 1). However, if the defendant files a request for recognition of a foreign judicial decision on a marital dispute, or the plaintiff files the request for recognition, and the defendant does not object, the exclusive competency of the courts in the Republic of Macedonia is not an obstacle for the recognition of that decision (Article 89, paragraph 2). Furthermore, the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts in the Republic of Macedonia is not an obstacle for recognition of a foreign judicial decision when it relates to the personal status of citizens of the country where the decision was brought (Article 94, paragraph 1).  If there is no agreed reciprocity in the foreign country, a starting point is the presumption that reciprocity exists, until the opposite is proven (Article 92, paragraph 3 of the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations).  A foreign judicial decision shall not be recognised if there is no reciprocity. The non-existence of reciprocity is not an obstacle for recognition of a foreign judicial decision brought on marital dispute or a dispute for establishing and denying fatherhood or motherhood, as well as for recognition and enforcement of a foreign judicial decision if petitioned by a citizen of Republic of Macedonia (Article 92, paragraph 2). The reciprocity also is not an obstacle when the recognition of a foreign judicial decision relates to the personal status of a citizen of the country where the decision was brought (Article 94, paragraph 1). The respect for the public order in the country of recognition is a generally accepted condition for recognition and enforcment of foreign judicial decisions, both on the basis of agreed and legal regime for recognition of such decisions. In Article 91 of the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations it is stipulated that a foreign judicial decision shall not be recognised if it is contrary to the public order determined by the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia. The application of certain subsidiary law, pursuant to the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations (Article 93), is a condition for recognition of foreign judicial decisions, but only in cases when the foreign court has decided upon the personal status of a citizen of the Republic of Macedonia and this law stipulates that the domestic law of the Republic of Macedonia should be applied. In all international treaties where the Republic of Macedonia is a contracting party, the legal validity and enforceability of the foreign judicial decision is a condition for recognition and enforcment of those decisions. A foreign judicial decision in order to be recognised in the Republic of Macedonia, it should have status of final decision according to the law of the country where it was brought.The applicant is also obliged to submit a relevant certificate, as a proof, either from the competent foreign court, or another institution (Article 87). A foreign judicial decision shall not be recognised if a court or another institution in the Republic of Macedonia has pronounced legally valid decision upon the same matter or if another foreign judicial decision upon the same matter has already been recognised in the Republic of Macedonia. The provision for litispendence is contained in Article 90, paragraph 2 from the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations, and it stipulates that the court shall end the procedure for recognition of a foreign judicial decision if an earlier procedure on the same legal matter and between the same parties is pending before a court in the Republic of Macedonia, until the conclusion of that procedure.   The principle of audiatur et altera pars is also one of the prerequisites for recognition of foreign judicial decisions. Namely, Article 88, paragraph 1 of the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations stipulates that the recognition of a foreign judicial decision shall be rejected, if the person against whom the decision has been brought declares that he could not participate in the procedure because of irregularities during the same.  It shall especially be deemed that the person against whom the foreign judicial decision has been pronounced could not have participated in the procedure because the summon,the appeal or the decision for starting the procedure were not delivered in person, i.e. there has been no attempt for delivery of summons in person, unless he/she in any way participated in first degree court hearings (Article 88, paragraph 2 from the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations). Almost all international agreements prescribe the existence of such a condition, additionally precising that if the person has been procedurally unable to attend, should have been adequately represented before the court. In the procedure for recognition of foreign judicial decisions, the court does not consider this negative presumption ex officio, but decides upon it only on the basis of an objection from the person against whom the decision has been brought. Regarding the procedure for recognition and enforcment of foreign judicial decisions it should be noted that the law does not contain special provisions regarding the procedure, except the provisions in Article 101 of the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Special Relations. The enforcment of foreign judicial decisions is defined as their recognition and acceptance as executive decisions, but there is no provision for a forceable enforcement. A number of international agreements which regulate the issue of recognition and enforcment of foreign judicial decisions contain certain procedural provisions for the recognition (e.g. the agreements with Bulgaria, France, the Czech Republic and Slovakia). The procedure for recognition of foreign judicial decisions is implemented by the rules of non-litigation procedures. The procedure is initiated by some of the persons who were parties in the procedure before the foreign court. The recognition of a foreign court decision for matters regarding the personal status may be petitioned by anyone with legal interest (Article 101, paragraph 6 from the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations). The law contains provisions on territorial jurisdiction, stipulating the jurisprudence of the court where the procedure for recognition or enforcment should be implemented (Article 101, paragraph 1). The provisions for jurisdiction ratione materiae are found in the Law on Courts (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 35/95 and 45/95), particularly in Article 32 paragraph 1b: the basic courts decide upon recognition and permission for enforcement of foreign judicial decisions. The court pronounce a decision upon request for recognition of foreign judicial decisions, and does not discuss the factual status or the legality of the foreign judiciary decisions, merely limiting on examining the current contractual, i.e. legal conditions for recognition of the decisions.  However, if the existence of obstacles to the recognition or the execution is established, the court shall reject the request with a decision. The decision may be appealed within 15 days from the day of receiving. An appellate court decides upon the appeal. All courts are competent to decide upon recognition of foreign judicial decisions if there is no previous special decision, as well as upon the pre-trial issues, but only about the procedure inter partes. This rule may especially be evident in case of forced enforcment of foreign condemnation judicial decisions, pointed out in the provision of Article 11 of the Law on Enforcement Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 53/97, 59/2000 and 64/2003) which stipulates that the enforcement decisions of foreign courts may be allowed and enforced in the Republic of Macedonia only if the decisions fulfil the presumptions for recognition prescribed by law.  Furthermore, the matter of recognition and enforcment of foreign arbitration decisions is regulated with the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations. Namely, a foreign arbitration decision is defined as an arbitration decision that was not pronounced in the Republic of Macedonia. The foreign arbitration decision belongs to the country where it was pronounced. Arbitration decision brought in the Republic of Macedonia, where the law of a foreign country was applied in the procedure, shall also be considered as a foreign arbitration decision, unless it is contrary to the enforcement regulations of the Republic of Macedonia. The foreign arbitration decision belongs to the country whose law was applied during the procedure (Article 97)  The conditions and procedures for recognition and execution of foreign and arbitration decisions are regulated with this law and they do not differ essentially from the provisions for recognition and enforcement of judicial decisions (Articles 100 and 101 of the law). b) Recognising foreign judicial decision in criminal matters The procedure for recognition and enforcement of foreign judicial decisions in criminal matters in the Republic of Macedonia is incorporated in the Macedonian legal system as an institute within the provisions of the Law on Criminal Procedure (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 15/97 and 44/02). Chapter XXX of the Code,regulating the Procedure for approval of international legal assistance and execution of international treaties in judicial criminal cases, in its Article 505 stipulates that the domestic courts may accept the request from a foreign body for enforcement of a criminal verdict pronounced by a foreign court or an international court, if it is determined with an international treaty, or if there is reciprocity, and if the sanction is also pronounced by the domestic court in accordance with the Criminal Code of the Republic of Macedonia. A Trial Chamber of the competent court composed according to Article 22, paragraph 6 pronounces a verdict and the public prosecutor and the attorney shall be informed for the session of the Chamber. The territorial jurisdiction of the court in the procedure of recognition and enforcement of foreign judicial decisions is determined according to the place of birth or last residence of the convicted person, while the jurisdiction rationa materiae is determined pursuant to Article 32, paragraph 1b from the Law on Courts (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 35/95 and 45/95), stipulating that the basic courts in the Republic of Macedonia are competent both for the recognition and the permission of enforcement of foreign courts' decisions. In the verdict with which the foreign judicial decision is recognised, the domestic court inserts the complete pronouncement and the title of the foreign court , and pronounces a sanction appropriate with the one pronounced by the foreign court, while the elaboration of the verdict presents the reasons guiding the court for the pronouncement of the sanction. This verdict may be appealed by the public prosecutor, the convicted person or his attorney.  In cases when a citizen of Republic of Macedonia has been sentenced abroad, and has filed a request for serving the remaining imprisonment in the Republic of Macedonia, this request is subject to recognition or enforcement of foreign judicial decision pursuant to the provisions of the European Convention on Transfer of Convicts (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 32/99), which is in force from 11.11.1999, while the court procedures are in accordance with the provisions of the Law on Criminal Procedure. If a foreign citizen convicted by a domestic court, or a person authorised by contract lodge file a request to the basic court for the convict to serve the remainig sentence of imprisonment in the country of citizenship, the basic court shall decide in compliance with the international treaty. The execution of international court’ verdicts is done according to the international treaties for its establishment, ratified in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia. The Chamber, pursuant to Article 22, paragraph 6 from the Law on Criminal Procedure, approves the authenticity and enforceability of the international court verdicts to the locally competent basic court, and determines the way of execution the sanctions or other imposed measures. Domestic courts according to conditions determined by international agreement, act upon a request of foreign body when taking temporary measures for securing pursuant to Article 203 of the Law on Criminal Procedure (regarding temporary freezing, seizure and confiscation of funds, bank accounts and financial transactions or criminal proceeds), or during execution of the measure confiscation of property and proceeds and seizure of objects. With a court decision and under conditions determined by ratified international agreement, the confiscated property and proceeds and the seized objects may be returned to a foreign country. Domestic courts, under conditions determined by international agreement and pursuant to Article 203-a of this law, may request the foreign bodies to determine temporary measures for securing and execution of the confiscation of property and proceeds and seizure of objects. In cases when an international treaty determines that the confiscated property and proceeds should be divided between the Republic of Macedonia and a third country, this proposal is submitted to the foreign country by the Ministry of Justice. Pursuant to Articles 118 and 119 of the Constitution of Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03), the international treaties ratified in accordance with the Constitution are a part of the internal legislation and cannot be changed with national law.  Republic of Macedonia has also concluded several bilateral agreements regulating the recognition and execution of foreign judicial decisions. The Republic of Macedonia, since its independence in 1991, has concluded such bilateral agreements with Republic of Croatia – the Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and Republic of Croatia on Mutual Execution on Court Rullings in Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 17/95) – in force from 07.08.1997; with Republic of Slovenia – the Agreement between Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Slovenia on Mutual Execution on Court Rullings in Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 24/96) – in force from 05.09.1997; with Republic of Albania - the Agreement between the Government of Macedonia and the Government of Albania on Mutual Execution on Court Rullings in Criminal Matters (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 16/98) – in force from 0509.1997; with Republic of Turkey - Agreement on Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Matters between Republic of Macedonia and Republic of Turkey (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 23/97) – in force from 28.08.2000; with State Union of Serbia and Montenegro - Agreement between Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro on Legal Assistance in Civil and Criminal Matters. Furthermore, it must be pointed out that Republic of Macedonia negotiate the conclusion of several bilateral agreements on international legal assistance with Bosnia and Herzegovina, Poland, the Russian Federation, the United States of America, Greece, Canada, Switzerland, Australia, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia. The procedures determined with these agreements mostly relate to the establishment  of the provisions of the already mentioned European Convention on Transfer of Convicts, and the differences relate to the simplification or harmonisation of procedures. 3. Are there special, simplified procedures available in your country for claiming and recovering non-contested and small claims? 
1. In the Republic of Macedonia, the simplified procedures for claiming and recovering non-contested and small value claims are regulated with the Law on Litigations (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 33/98, 44/02). Within this law, two separate chapters regulate the institutes of payment order (Articles 417 to 427) and procedures in small value litigations (Articles 428 – 437). Namely, pursuant to the provisions of the Law on Litigations, the court shall issue a payment order, i.e. shall order the defendant to recover the claim when the claim relates to outstanding financial claims, which are proven with an authentic document filed together with the lawsuit in original or as a validated copy. The law deems authentic any public documents, private documents on which the signature of the obligor is validated by a body competent for validating, bills of exchange and protested cheques or return receipts if they are needed for establishing a claim, copies of documents from validated business books, invoices and documents that have significance as public documents by the virtue of certain regulations. If the conditions on issuing a payment order are met, the court shall issue a payment order ex officio, although the plaintiff did not request it in the lawsuit. However, if enforcement may be petitioned on the basis of an authentic document, pursuant to the Law on Execution Procedure, the court shall issue a payment order only if the plaintiff makes possible the existence of legal interest for issuing a payment order. If the plaintiff does not make possible the existence of legal interest for issuing a payment order, the court shall reject the claim. In the cases when the claims of the lawsuit relate to an outstanding financial claim not exceeding the total of 30,000 MKD, the court shall issue a payment order against the defendant, although authentic documents have not been filed together with the lawsuit, if the basis and the amount of the debt, and the proofs on basis of which it is possible to establish the truthfulness of the lawsuit allegations are presented. Such a payment order may be issued only against the principal debtor. The court issues the payment order without a trial hearing. It orders that the defendant is obliged to recover the claim from the lawsuit and the expenses determined by the court within eight days, and in bills of exchange and cheque disputes within three days after the reception of the payment order, or to appeal the payment order within the same period. The court shall warn the defendant that it will reject any untimely filed appeals on the payment order. The defendant may contest the payment order only with an appeal. If the payment order is contested only regarding the decision on expenses, this decision may be disputed only with an appeal against a decision. For the part non-contested with an appeal, the payment order remains in effect. Untimely, incomplete or inpermissible appeals shall be rejected by the court without a trial hearing. If the appeals are filed in a timely manner, the court will evaluate whether it is necessary to set a date for a pre-trial, or it may immediately set a date for the main hearing. During the pre-trial and on the main hearing, the parties may present new facts and propose new evidence, while the defendant may present new objections concerning the contested part of the payment order. With the decision on the principal matter, the court shall decide whether the payment order shall remain completely or partially in effect, or it shall be revoked. If the defendant objects that there were no legal grounds for issuance of a payment order, or that there are obstacles for the further proceedings, the court shall decide on that objection first. If it finds that such an objection is well grounded, it will revoke the payment order with a decision, and after the effectiveness of the decision, shall start the hearing on the principal matter, when there is room for such a hearing, and if it rejects the objection, it shall proceed with the hearing on the principal matter, and the decision of the court shall be entered into the decision on the principal matter. When the court brings a decision on rejection of the lawsuit, it shall also revoke the payment order. The plaintiff may withdraw the lawsuit without the defendant’s consent only until the filing of the appeal. In that case, the court shall revoke the payment order with a decision. If the defendant revokes all the filed objections until the conclusion of the main hearing, the payment order shall remain in force. 2. The Law on Litigations regulates the small claims with a special chapter. Small claims, as defined with the provisions of this chapter, are claims in which the lawsuit claim relates to financial claims not exceeding the sum of 30,000 MKD. Small claims are also claims in which the lawsuit complaint does not relate to financial claims, and the plaintiff stated in the lawsuit that they agree to receive as compensation for the complaint a certain monetary amount not exceeding the sum of 30,000 MKD, as well as disputes in which the subject of the lawsuit complaint is not a monetary amount, but handing over a movable object with a value, stated in the lawsuit by the plaintiff, not exceeding the sum of 30,000 MKD. Disputes regarding immovables, labour relation disputes and property evaluation disputes are not deemed small claims. The procedures for small claims shall be also implemented for appeals against payment orders if the value of the contested part of the payment order does not exceed the sum of 30,000 MKD. During the procedures for small claims, special appeals only against the decision for ending of the procedure are not permitted. If the plaintiff modifies the lawsuit complaint in a way that the value of the disputed object exceeds the sum of 30,000 MKD, the procedure shall be concluded according to the provisions for regular procedures of this law, while if the plaintiff, before the conclusion of the main hearing governed by the provisions of this law for regular procedures, modifies the lawsuit complaint in a way that it no longer exceeds the amount of 30,000 MKD, the rest of the procedure shall be governed by the provisions for small claims’ procedures. If the plaintiff does not appear at the first date for the main hearing, and they have been legally summoned, it shall be deemed they have revoked the lawsuit, unless the defendant starts a discussion. The judgement in the small claims’ procedures is proclaimed right after the conclusion of the main hearing. The judgement or the decision which concludes the dispute in the small claims’ procedures may be contested by an appeal as a legal remedy only for essential violation of the provisions of the law, or because of incorrect appliance of the substantive law. A revision of the decision of the second instance court is not permitted (extraordinary legal remedy). 
4. How are foreign decisions in family law matters (i.e., legal separation, divorce, marriage annulment, parental responsibility, maintenance obligations) recognised and enforced? 
Foreign decisions in family law matters are recognised and enforced on the basis of the same legislation as other decisions in civil matters. For more details see answer 24_L_02However, it should be pointed out that the recognition and enforcement of foreign judicial decisions in family matters has a special treatment. These decisions create, by their nature, a change in the family conditions of persons (e.g. deprivation or re-claiming of ability to work, parental rights, placing a person under custody, divorce or marriage annulment) which is most frequently registered by the relevant institutions of the state, whose national is the person in question. The Republic of Macedonia, when a party of international conventions regulating this area, provides recognition of judicial decisions in effect brought by one contracting party to the other contracting party without any court examination. Article 94, paragraph 1 of the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No. 43/82), which relates to the decisions of foreign courts regarding the personal status of a citizen of a country whose decision is in question, stipulates simplified recognition, since in such cases the conditions relating to jurisdiction, public order and reciprocity are not examined. In such cases, it is possible to recognise those decisions in the Republic of Macedonia although an international agreement with the relevant country is not concluded, nor an actual reciprocity in judicial decisions with that country is established. Likewise, in many international conventions there is a rule that a judicial decision of one contracting country regarding the personal status of citizens of third countries shall be recognised in another contracting country only if such a decision is also recognised in the country of the citizenship of the persons whose status is changed (e.g. the agreements with France, Greece and Hungary). Only if such a decision fulfils the conditions for recognition in the country of citizenship of the persons whose status is changed, the decision shall be recognised in the Republic of Macedonia. Article 95 of the Law on Resolving Conflicts of Laws with the Regulations from Third Countries in Certain Relations contains this rule, too. Most international conventions allow judicial decisions of one contracting party in regard to the personal status of citizens of another contracting party to be recognised in that other country. In that case, apart from the conditions for recognition stipulated by the agreement, additional conditions for recognition can only be provided if these decisions do not oppose the regulations of the country that recognises them, and that would be applied in the legal matter, and if it was taken in a country that recognises those regulations or does not substantially deviate from them. This remedy is provided in Article 93 of the Law on Resolving Conflicts of Laws with the Regulations from Third Countries in Certain Relations. The Republic of Macedonia is a party to the United Nations Convention on the Recovery Abroad of Maintenance (20.06.1956), and has designated agencies for filing and receiving claims. The filing agency in the Republic of Macedonia is the Ministry of Justice, while the receiving (mediatory) agency is the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The procedure for realisation of maintenance claims is mediated by the Social Affairs Centre, covering the territory of residence of the debtor. When the debtor is not willing to voluntarily comply with his/her obligation, the matter is referred to the court. The enforcement procedure is implemented on the basis of the Law on Execution Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 53/97, 59/00 and 64/03).  Regarding international conventions please refer to answer 24_L_02
5. How are cases of international child abduction dealt with under the 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction? Please specify the number of applications made under the Convention for the return of children for the last three years, the outcome of the applications (return or non-return of the child) as well as the average duration of the procedure. 
The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy is responsible to consider applications made under the 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction. For that purpose the Ministry cooperates with the Social Work Centres for voluntary return of children in the country of their last residence, pursuant to Article 10 of the Convention; with courts – in terms of forwarding the decisions brought by the Social Work Centres; the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, in order to deliver court decisions, pursuant to Articles 11 and 12 of the Convention; as well as with the law enforcement agencies - in finding children.  In the last three years a total of 7 applications under the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction have been filed. The procedures for 5 of them are concluded with the following outcome: 4 applications under the Convention were accepted and children were returned to the country of residence; one application was rejected and the child remained in the Republic of Macedonia. The procedures for the remaining 2 applications are in progress. The average duration of the procedures up to the final enforcement of the decisions is three years. This is mostly due to the fact that agencies in the Republic of Macedonia make all possible efforts and take every appropriate action for voluntarily return of the children, pursuant to Article 10 of the Convention. 6. How does your legislation solve conflicts of jurisdiction and applicable law as regards international insolvency proceedings? How are foreign decisions on insolvency recognised and enforced? 
The Bankruptcy Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 55/97, 53/00, 37/02 and 17/04)), in Part One, Chapter X, regulates the jurisdiction of courts in the Republic of Macedonia (Articles 335 to 342). The court in the Republic of Macedonia has exclusive jurisdiction for bankruptcy proceedings against a debtor having a main office in the Republic of Macedonia. If the debtor – legal entity - has a real main office in the Republic of Macedonia, and not in the country where it was established, it shall be deemed as domestic legal entity and bankruptcy proceedings against this legal entity shall be under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Macedonian court. The proceedings encompass the whole property of the debtor, regardless of the fact whether that property is located in the Republic of Macedonia or abroad. Bankruptcy proceedings against a debtor having a branch office without the capacity of a legal entity in the Republic of Macedonia shall also fall within the jurisdiction of the Macedonian court. The bankruptcy proceedings from this paragraph encompass only the debtor’s property located in the Republic of Macedonia. If conducting bankruptcy proceedings in the Republic of Macedonia would be in the jurisdiction of several basic courts, the court that first received a proposal for opening bankruptcy proceedings has territorial jurisdiction. If the foreign debtor, who has a branch office without the capacity of a legal entity in the Republic of Macedonia, is a citizen, or has a main office or a real main office in a country with which there is no reciprocity in recognition of judicial decisions regarding bankruptcy proceedings, the bankruptcy proceedings for that debtor regarding the property of the branch office in the Republic of Macedonia shall be under the exclusive jurisdiction of the Macedonian court. General rules governing the recognition of foreign judicial decisions by the Republic of Macedonia are also applicable for recognition of foreign judicial decisions for opening bankruptcy proceedings against a debtor with a main office in the jurisdiction of a foreign court. The provisions regulating international bankruptcy apply only if all conditions for recognising  foreign judicial decisions according to the legislation of the Republic of Macedonia are met, and in particular if: the decision was reached by a court of jurisdiction; the decision is in force in the territory where the bankruptcy proceedings were opened; the decision is not contrary to the public law and order in the Republic of Macedonia established by the Constitution; and if there is reciprocity. Existence of reciprocity in terms of recognition of foreign judicial decisions regarding bankruptcy proceedings shall not be presumed. It shall be assumed that there is no such reciprocity until the Ministry of Justice submits a clarification thereof. Until the Ministry of Justice of Republic of Macedonia confirms the reciprocity, the absence of reciprocity shall present an obstacle for the recognition of the foreign judicial decision. If some of the conditions set by the legislation of the Republic of Macedonia regarding the recognition of foreign judicial decisions are not met, especially if there is no reciprocity, the foreign judicial decision reached regarding the bankruptcy proceedings shall not be recognised and it shall be deemed that for any related matter the Macedonian court has exclusive competence. The decision for recognition of the foreign judicial decision is published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia in a manner prescribed with the Bankruptcy Law for announcing decisions for opening bankruptcy proceedings. The decision is delivered to the proposer, to the foreign bankruptcy trustee, to the bankruptcy debtor, to banks where the debtor has accounts, and to the Public Prosecutor. The decision shall also be delivered to the bodies in charge of keeping public records on real estate rights (cadastre), the register of ships, of ships in construction and of aircrafts. These bodies shall ex officio register the recognition of the foreign decision for opening bankruptcy proceedings, on the basis of the received decision. With the recognition, the foreign decision is equivalent to a decision of a Macedonian court for opening bankruptcy proceedings, and in Republic of Macedonia it can only have the effects compliant to the domestic bankruptcy law. The provisions of the Bankruptcy Law apply to the legal position of the foreign debtor and to the foreign bankruptcy trustee, accordingly. If the foreign court decision on bankruptcy proceedings opened against a foreign debtor is recognised, for the parts of the debtor’s property located on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia neither a new Bankruptcy Trustee, nor a Board of Creditors shall be appointed in the Republic of Macedonia. The time periods defined by the Law of Republic of Macedonia start expiring with the publishing of the decision on recognition. With the amendments to the Bankruptcy Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 17/04) it is stipulated that the provisions of this law shall apply to the bankruptcy proceedings opened after this law entered into force, as well as to the pending bankruptcy proceedings, and for those proceedings where hearing date has not been set until the day of entry into force of this law.  7. How are foreign judicial and extrajudicial documents received and served? How are your country’s judicial and extra-judicial documents transmitted when they have to be served abroad? 
Pursuant to the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 15/97, 44/02, 74/04), the Law on Civil Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 33/98 and 44/02) and the Law on General Administrative Procedure (“Official Gazette of SFRY Nos. 52/56; 10/65; 18/65; 4/77;11/78; 32/78; 9/86; 16/86; 47/86-consolidated text and “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” No. 44/02), the foreign judicial and extrajudicial documents are received in the Republic of Macedonia from foreign judicial and administrative bodies through diplomatic channels. These are also used when judicial and extrajudicial documents need to be transmitted to competent foreign bodies. In emergency cases requests for legal assistance may be transmitted through the Ministry of the Interior – Interpol Section. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs forwards the requests for legal assistance in civil and criminal matters to the Ministry of Justice, while it forwards the requests in administrative matters to the responsible administrative bodies (the competent Ministry). Pursuant to the Law on Criminal Procedure (Articles 503 and 504) and the Law on Civil Procedure (Article 125), diplomatic channels are also used if other means of transmission are not defined by an international agreement (multilateral or bilateral). If a written document should be delivered to a citizen of the Republic of Macedonia in a foreign country, this can be done by a diplomatic representative of the Republic of Macedonia in charge of the consular matters in that country. This way of servicing documents is only valid if the person in question is willing to accept the document.    The Ministry of Foreign Affairs forwards the foreign authority’s request for legal assistance to the Ministry of Justice, which transmits it for further procedure to the court of jurisdiction in the territory where the person to be serviced resides. The permissibility and the way of assistance are decided by the court according to national legislation. The Republic of Macedonia is a party to the European Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters with Additional Protocols from 1999, and the procedure for serving legal documents is completely in accordance with international practice. 8. How do you deal with requests from foreign courts to take evidence? How are your country’s requests for taking evidence abroad transmitted? 
Pursuant to Article 504 of the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04) the Ministry of Foreign Affairs forwards the request for legal assistance from a foreign court, to the Ministry of Justice. This Ministry transmits it for further procedure to the competent court for taking evidence. This is the court that has jurisdiction either to interview or to examine a person or to proceed investigative action. The gathered evidence is transmitted to the requesting country through diplomatic channels. These are also used when a Macedonian court requests a foreign court for legal assistance in taking evidence. In emergency cases such requests may be transmitted through the Ministry of the Interior – Interpol Section. Pursuant to Article 15 of the European Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters with Additional Protocols, the requests from foreign courts for taking evidence are transmitted from the Ministry of Justice of a requesting country to the Ministry of Justice of the requested country and are returned back in the same manner. 9. Is State compensation to victims of crime available? If so, how is it organised? 
Compensation is determined on the basis of the rules for compensation established in the Law on Obligations (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 18/01, 4/02 and 5/03). Compensation comprises compensation of the entire damage (both material and non-material) which the injured party had suffered. In a case of death, bodily injury or damage of the health, a financial compensation is awarded in the form of a financial rent which covers the costs of treatment, the lost earning because of the inability to work, compensation for lost or reduced opportunities for further advancement, etc. The Law on Obligations also provides compensation of the non-material damage. Pursuant to Article 189 of the Law , for suffered physical pain, for suffered emotional pain due to the limitations of vital activities,  disfiguring, violation of the reputation, honour, freedom or the rights of the person, death of a close relative and suffered fear, the court shall award a fair financial compensation if it finds that the circumstances of the case, and especially the severity of pains and fear and their duration, are justifing this decision, regardless of the compensation of material damage. In a case of a death of a person or in case of exceptionally severe invalidity, the court can award members of the closer family (marital partner, children and parents) fair compensation for their emotional pains (Article 190). The civil procedure is instigated by a complaint. Competent courts acting upon such cases are the basic courts. Special cases of liability enumerated in the law are: responsibility for terrorist acts, public protests or events; responsibility for acts of corruption perpetrated by civil servants in execution of their offices and compensation of damage for violent criminal offences committed by an unknown perpetrator. In all of these cases, the responsibility for compensation of damage lies within the state (Articles 166, 167 and 168) In cases when criminal offences are perpetrated by an authorised officer, the protection can be also enforced through the Ombudsman, who pursuant to the Constitution protects the freedoms and rights of the citizens when they are infringed by an act or action of state administrative authorities or bodies and organisations with public competence. If the Ombudsman concludes that the constitutional and legal rights of the citizens are infringed, they can propose instigation of a disciplinary procedure against the authorised officer, or submit a request to the public prosecutor to instigate a criminal procedure against that person.  Also, the injured party (the victim) has the right, within the criminal procedure, to submit a property claim pursuant to the provisions of the Law on Criminal Procedure.  Pursuant to Article 96 of the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02, 74/04), a property claim for a damage suffered because of a perpetrated crime is resolved within a criminal procedure, upon a proposal of an authorised person, but under the condition that the procedure is not significantly delayed if such a claim is decided upon. The property claim can be related to compensation of damage, restoration of objects or annulment of certain legal matter. In case of insurance, such claim can be filed against an insurance company as well. The proposal can be filed not later then the end of the main hearing before the basic court. The proposing party is obliged to define their claim and to enclose evidence. The authorised persons may withdraw from the claim and realise their rights through a dispute until the completion of the main hearing.  When the accused was found guilty, the court decides on the property claim of the damaged party fully or partially, and if the evidence do not provide sufficient grounds for such decision, the court will, by a judgement, recognise only the grounds, whereas on the amount of the claim or the remainder of that amount it will bring an additional judgement. In case of a decision by which the accused is acquitted or the charges are refused or the procedure is terminated by a decision or the indictment is rejected, the court will instruct the damaged party to enforce the property claim through a dispute (Article 101). The Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos.37/96, 80/99, 4/02, 43/03, and 19/04) also contains provisions on protection of the damaged party. Namely, pursuant to Article 99, the  damaged party who has been referred to a litigation regarding their property claim, may petition for a settlement from the amount of the confiscated assets, if they instigate litigation within six months from the date when the decision by which they are  referred to litigation becomes enforceable and if they request settlement of the claim from the confiscated assets within three months from the date when the decision by which their claim was established has become enforceable. The damaged party who has not identified a property claim may petition for a settlement from the confiscated assets if they have initiated a litigation to identify their claim within three months from the date when they have learned about the  judgement by which the proceeds have been confiscated, and not later than two years from the date when the decision on confiscation of the proceeds has become enforceable, and if they request settlement from the confiscated assets within three months from the date when the ruling which establishes their claim has become enforceable. Also, the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No 74/04) introduces a new Chapter XIX – ,  Protection of witnesses, collaborators of justice and victims. Namely, the public prosecutor, the investigating judge or the president of the court, in the course of the procedure undertake actions to ensure efficient protection of the witnesses, collaborators of justice, and of the victims if they appear as witnesses in the procedure, when there is a risk that they will be exposed to intimidation, threat with retaliation or risk to life, health or the physical integrity, or if their protection is needed. The protection is enforced by special way of interrogation and participation in the procedure. In these cases, the witness is interrogated only in the presence of the public prosecutor and the investigating judge, or the president of the court, and in a location which guarantees protection of the identity. Also, by consent of the victim, other technical means for communication and telecommunication may be used for their interrogation. The transcript of the minutes with the witness’ statement, without their signature, is submitted to the defendant and the defence attorney who can in writing, through the court, question the witness.  Protection can be also rendered through inclusion in the Witness Protection Programme. A request for inclusion in the Programme is submitted to the Public Prosecutor of the Republic of Macedonia, and is submitted by the competent public prosecutor, investigating judge or the president of the court council. If there are conditions for inclusion in the programme, the Public Prosecutor of the Republic of Macedonia submits a proposal to the competent body to bring a decision on inclusion into the Programme. 10. Is it possible for parties involved in civil litigation in your country but not present in it, to ask for legal aid in the country of their habitual residency? If so, how are these requests received and dealt with by your country? Is the same possibility available to parties present in your country who are involved in litigation abroad? If so, how are these requests presented and then transmitted abroad? 
The Republic of Macedonia, by succession, is a party to the Hague Convention on Civil Procedure (1954), and the Convention on International Access to Justice (1980), which provide several possibilities for granting legal aid to foreign persons before national courts and in civil cases.   Pursuant to the Hague Convention, the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Macedonia grants legal aid. Applications for legal aid can be filed in the Ministry of Justice – Sector for International Legal Aid, which forwards them to the competent bodies in the Republic of Macedonia, i.e. to the competent Ministries in the relevant countries if provided so by a bilateral agreement. If international conventions prescribe transmission by diplomatic channels, this way of forwarding the applications is used. It should be pointed out that applications relating to the above mentioned subject have not yet been received in the Ministry of Justice, but if they are received in the future, they shall be acted upon in the same manner, disregarding their origin, national or foreign. Namely, if the application originates from a national law enforcement body, the Ministry of Justice shall transmit it to the competent bodies in the country of the person’s permanent residence, and in an opposite case, if it is of foreign origin, it shall transmit it to the competent law enforcement body in the Republic of Macedonia. Depending on each individual case, the Ministry of Justice shall act in accordance with international conventions covering this matter, as well as with the national legislation which regulates the area of international legal assistance. 11. Which alternative dispute resolution methods are available in your country, and how are they organised? How is their quality ensured? 
The Law on Litigation Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 33/98 and 44/02) regulates the procedure before arbitration courts with a special Chapter (Articles 438 to 459), which could be considered as a type of alternative dispute resolution. The provisions of this Chapter regulate the procedures before selected courts, having a seat in the Republic of Macedonia, unless the provisions of another law or an international treaty do not stipulate that a certain arbitration court with a seat in the Republic of Macedonia is deemed as foreign arbitration court. For disputes having an international element, and for the rights they are freely entitled to, the parties may agree on the jurisdiction of a domestic or foreign arbitration court if at least one of them is a natural person with a habitual or permanent residence abroad, or a legal person with the main office abroad, if exclusive jurisdiction of a court in the Republic of Macedonia is not prescribed. For disputes without an international element, the parties may refer to the regular arbitration courts established with the chambers of commerce and with other organisations defined by law. Agreement for an arbitration court may be concluded both for a certain dispute, and for any future disputes that might arise from a certain legal relation, and it is deemed valid only if concluded in writing (the Law also accepts letter exchange, telegrams, telexes, and other means of communication that provide for a written proof of the concluded agreement). The agreement on the arbitration court is also deemed concluded by an exchange of a lawsuit in which the plaintiff points to the existence of that agreement, and a response to the lawsuit in which the defendant does not contest it. The agreement on an arbitration court may be proved only with documents. The number of judges of the arbitration court must be odd. If by the agreement of the parties the number of judges is not defined, every party appoints one judge, and they elect a Presiding Judge. The judges of the regular courts may be elected only for Presiding Judges of the arbitration court. If the parties have agreed upon the jurisdiction of an arbitration court for a certain dispute, the court to which the lawsuit was filed for the same dispute and between the same parties, upon an objection of the defendant, shall have no jurisdiction, shall revoke the actions already taken in the procedures, and reject the lawsuit. This objection may be filed by the defendant at the pre-trial hearing the latest, and if the pre-trial hearing is not set, at the main hearing, before a discussion on the principal matter is entered. The party that according to the agreement for the arbitration court should appoint a judge of the arbitration court may call the opposed party to do the appointment within fifteen days, and to inform about it the other party. If the appointment of the judge should be done by a third party, each party may invite the third party to appoint the judge. The person invited to appoint a judge for the arbitration court is tied to the appointment at the moment this has been announced to the opposed party, i.e. to one of the parties. If the judge of the arbitration court is not appointed on time, the judge, upon a party's proposal, is appointed by the court. If the appointed judges cannot agree upon the appointment of the presiding judge, it shall be appointed by the court upon a proposal by each judge or a party. For the appointment of a judge or a presiding judge of the arbitration court, the responsibility lies with the court, which would have the jurisdiction for the dispute at the first instance, if there were no agreement about the arbitration court. The decision of the court may not be appealed. It is mandatory to exempt the judge of the arbitration court when reasons for exemption determined by the Law on Civil Procedure exist. The parties may submit petition for exemption of a judge of the arbitration court for the same reasons, only if the reason for exemption has occurred, or the party has found about it after the appointment of the arbitration judge. The hearing of witnesses before the arbitration court is done without taking an oath. The arbitration court may not use compelling means or pronounce sentences against the witnesses, the parties or the other persons participating in the procedure. The arbitration court may reach a verdict on the grounds of righteousness, only if the parties granted it such an authorisation.  When the arbitration court consists of more than one judge, the verdict is reached by a majority of votes, unless the agreement upon the arbitration court prescribes otherwise. The verdict of the appointed court must be explained, unless the parties have agreed otherwise. The original of the verdict and all its copies are signed by all arbitration judges. The verdict is valid even if any of the judges refuses to sign it, if the verdict has been signed by the majority of judges, and they have confirmed this refusal of signing. The parties are served with copies of the verdict.  The verdict of the arbitration court has the power of effective verdict for the parties, unless the agreement provides for the opportunity to appeal the verdict before a higher instance arbitration court. The verdict of the arbitration court may be annulled by an appeal from any party, which may be filed before the court of jurisdiction within thirty days. The appeal is decided by the court that would otherwise have jurisdiction over the case in first instance. The reasons for annulment of the verdict of the arbitration court are enumerated in the Law. A year after the verdict of the arbitration court has become effective, annulment of the verdict may not be petitioned for. Regarding alternative dispute resolution, bearing in mind that out-of-court settlement of disputes, using the institute of mediation, would directly result in reduction of the number of court cases, thus easing the burden on the court system, the Strategy for Reform of the Judiciary includes enactment of a Law on Mediation. This Law would regulate the cases and different forms of mediation, reconciliation, and dispute resolution through arbitration, as well as the legal validity of the acts and decisions reached in such out-of-court procedures. 
12. How does your legislation solve conflicts of law for contractual and non-contractual obligations? 
In the Republic of Macedonia the obligations stemming from international legal assistance and the competencies for contractual and other obligations, i.e. the conflict between the laws for contractual and non-contractual obligations, are regulated with the Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations (“Official Gazette of SFRY”, Nos. 43/82), transposed into national legislation of the Republic of Macedonia by the Article 5 of the Constitutional Law on Implementing the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia from 1991. This Law contains rules on determining law that has to be applied in personal, family and proprietary relations, i.e. material and legal relations with international element (relevant law). Pursuant to Article 19 of this Law, the law chosen by the contracting parties is deemed the relevant law, unless this Law or any other international treaty determines otherwise. In cases when the contracting parties have not chosen a relevant law, and if the special circumstances in the case do not point to some other law, pursuant to Article 20 of this Law, the relevant law shall be the following:  1.  For contracts for movable property sale – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the seller had the residence or the seat; 2.  For work contracts or construction contracts – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the entrepreneur had the residence or the seat; 3.  For contracts on authorisation – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the proxy holder had the residence or the seat;  4.  For contracts on mediation – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the mediator had the residence or the seat; 5.  For contracts on commission – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the commissioner had the residence or the seat;  6.  For contracts on shipping services – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the carrier had the residence or the seat; 7.  For contracts on lease of movable objects – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the lessor had the residence or the seat;  8.  For contracts on loan – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the loaner had the residence or the seat; 9.  For contracts on service – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the provider had the residence or the seat; 10. For contracts on deposits – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the depositary had the residence or the seat; 11. For contracts on storage – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the storage provider had the residence or the seat; 12. For contracts on transport – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the transporteur (driver) had the residence or the seat;  13. For contracts on insurance – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the insurer had the residence or the seat; 14. For contracts on copyrights – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the author has the residence or the seat; 15. For contracts on gifts – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the gift giver had the residence or the seat; 16. For stock exchange operations – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the stock exchange had the seat; 17. For contracts on independent bank guarantees – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the guarantor has the seat; 18. For contracts on transfer of technology (licences, etc.) – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the user of technology has the seat;  19. For property claims from employment contracts – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted , the work was or has been carried out; 20. For other contracts – the law of the state where at the time when the offer was accepted the bidder had the residence or the seat. When the contractual parties have not otherwise determined the relations between them, the relevant law for the contract in question shall be also qualifying for determining the hour when the acquirer of the movable object is entitled to the products and the benefits from the product, as well as for determining the hour from which the acquirer takes the risk for the objects (Article 22).  The law regarding the place where the object is to be delivered is the relevant law if the contractual parties have not agreed otherwise regarding the manner of delivery of the object and on the measures to be taken if the delivery is rejected (Article 23). For actions of renounce of claims or taking over of debts towards a debtor, i.e. a creditor that has not participated in the renouncing or taking over, the law that is relevant for the claim or the debt, shall be applied (Article 24). The Law on Deciding upon Collisions of the Laws with the Regulations of Third Countries in Certain Relations (“Official Gazette of the SFRY”, No. 43/82) defines the relevant law for accessory legal matters.Unless otherwise is provided by national legislation or an international treaty the law relevant for the principal legal matter shall apply (Article 25). For unilateral legal matters the law of the state where the debtor has permanent residence or the seat is applied as the relevant law (Article 26). For acquiring without a legal basis, the relevant law for the legal relation that occurred, that was expected or assumed, and which was the reason for acquirement, shall apply. For unsolicited execution of other’s tasks the law of the place where action took place is applied as relevant law. For obligations arising from unsolicited usage of objects, and other non-contractual obligations that do not come out of the damage liability, the law of the location where the facts causing the obligation occurred, shall be the relevant law. (Article 27) For non-contractual damage liability, unless for special cases otherwise is determined by law international treaty , the law of the location where the action took place, or the law of the location where the consequences occurred, depending which law is more lenient toward damaged party, shall be the  relevant law. This law is also qualifying for non-contractual damage liability that has occurred in relation to the legal obligations from Article 27 from this law. For unlawfulness of an action, the law of the location where the action took place or where the consequence occurred, shall be the relevant law,–while if the action took place or the consequence occurred in several locations - it is sufficient the action to be unlawful  according to the law of any of those locations (Article 28). If the event, wherefrom the obligation for damage compensation arises, took place on a vessel on an open sea or in an aircraft, the law of the location where the facts that caused the obligation for damage compensation occurred, shall be the law of the country of origin of the vessel, i.e. the law of the country where the aircraft is registered (Article 29). For contracts relating to real estate property, the law of the country where the real estate property is located is the exclusively relevant law (Article 21).  
13. How does your legislation solve conflicts of jurisdiction in criminal matters? 
Jurisdiction of courts is regulated by a separate Chapter in the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04), (Articles 21 to 35). Pursuant to the Law, courts are deciding in criminal cases within the limits of their jurisdiction set by the Law.  Regarding territorial jurisdiction, in principle, jurisdiction over the case belongs to the court that is covering the territory where the crime was committed or attempted to be committed. If the crime was committed or attempted to be committed on territories of different courts, or on the borders of those territories, or it is uncertain where it was committed, or attempted to be committed, the first court where the procedure was initiated has jurisdiction, and if the procedure has not yet been initiated, the first court where the charge was filed has jurisdiction. The crime (pursuant to the Criminal Code) is deemed to be committed both on the place where the perpetrator operated or was obliged to operate and on the place where the consequence has occurred. The conspiring and the attempt for a crime are deemed perpetrated both on the place where the perpetrator has operated, and the place where according to the plan the consequence did or could have occurred. According to the Law, in cases of private complaints in criminal matters, several options are available. The initiator of the complaint is entitled to decide whether he/she will bring a private complaint before the court according to the place of perpetration, or before the court according to the territory where a defendant has temporary or permanent residence.  The general principle of territorial jurisdiction according to the location of the domestic port (i.e. domestic jurisdiction) also applies to crimes perpetrated on a domestic vessel or a domestic aircraft while in a domestic port or out of it. If it is not known where the crime was perpetrated or the location is out of the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, the Law prescribes that a court, where the defendant has a temporary or permanent residence, has jurisdiction. If the court on which territory the defendant has a temporary or permanent residence has already initiated the procedure, the case remains in its jurisdiction even if the location of perpetration of the crime is detected afterwards. If it is neither known where the crime was perpetrated, nor the place of temporary or permanent residence of the defendant, or they are both out of the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, the court where the apprehension or surrender of the defendant occurred, has jurisdiction. It is clear that this provision represents an exemption from the general rule of defining territorial jurisdiction of the courts. If a person perpetrated crimes both in the Republic of Macedonia and abroad, the court that has jurisdiction for the crime committed in the Republic of Macedonia has jurisdiction. The territorial jurisdiction for the crime perpetrated in the Republic of Macedonia is defined according to the above mentioned rules. In cases where it is impossible to establish the territorial jurisdiction according to the provisions of the Law, the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia, in regard of the subject matter, shall assign jurisdiction to one of the courts to proceed the case. The determination of territorial jurisdiction in this manner is foremost due to the impossibility of using general rules in regard of this matter. The Law also contains provisions for determining territorial and jurisdiction ratione materiae through merging and separation of procedures. Furthermore, provisions of the Law provide rules for delegation of territorial jurisdiction. Namely, if the competent court can not proceed due to legal or factual reasons, it is obliged to inform the higher court about this fact. Subsequently, the higher court assigns jurisdiction to another court on its territory, subject to hearing the Public Prosecutor, in case the procedure has been initiated upon a Public Prosecutor’s request. Appeal against this decision is not allowed. The delegated court has the jurisdiction until the end of the procedure, disregarding the fact that the impediments, which have led to delegation might have ceased to exist. In adition, if it is obvious that a procedure is easier to pursue, or if there are other important reasons, the common higher court can decide another court on its territory to have jurisdiction for a certain procedure. The court may reach this decision following a proposal of the investigative judge, a single judge, the President of the Chamber or of the Public Prosecutor, authorised for the proceedings before the court that decides on delegation of the territorial jurisdiction, if a criminal procedure is conducted at the Prosecutor's request. The court is obliged to pay due attention to its jurisdiction during the entire course of the proceeding. As soon as it notices that it has no jurisdiction, it shall proclaim itself without jurisdiction for the case. After the finality of this decision, it shall transfer the case to the court of jurisdiction. The obligation of the court to consider its jurisdiction (both territorial and ratione materiae) relates to all stages of the procedure. After the Prosecutor’s charge is final, the court may not refuse territorial jurisdiction, nor may the parties oppose its territorial jurisdiction. According to this provision, refusing territorial jurisdiction over the case by a court is restricted to the moment of finality of the Prosecutor’s charge. The court that has refused jurisdiction is obliged to take actions if their delay would risk the course of the procedure. If the court to which the case has been transferred, considers that the court which transferred the case or some other court has jurisdiction, it shall initiate a procedure for resolving the conflict of jurisdiction. Namely, the obligation for initiating a procedure for resolving a negative conflict of jurisdiction lies within the court to which the case was transferred. When a second instance court reaches a decision upon an appeal against the decision of the first instance court on refusing jurisdiction, the decision regarding jurisdiction also bounds the court to which the case was transferred, if the second instance court is authorised for resolving the conflict of jurisdiction between these courts. The conflict of jurisdiction between the courts is resolved by the first common higher court. Before reaching a decision upon the conflict of jurisdiction, the court shall ask the Public Prosecutor authorised for the proceedings before that court whether the criminal procedure is conducted at the Public Prosecutor’s request. No special appeal is allowed against this decision. Until the conflict of jurisdiction between the courts is resolved, they are both obliged to take actions if their cancellation would be a risk for the course of the procedure. 14. Which procedures are available in the field of mediation in criminal matters? 
Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04
contains provisions regulating this issue. Pursuant to Article 145 of this Law, the Public Prosecutor, in agreement with the injured party, may postpone criminal prosecution for a criminal offence for which a fine or a sentence of imprisonment up to three years is prescribed, if the suspect is prepared to conduct according to the instructions of the Public Prosecutor and to fulfil specific obligations reducing or eliminating the harmful consequences of the crime. The suspect may accept the obligations for reducing or eliminating the damage, paying of certain amount of funds to the budget or another institution performing public duties, or for humanitarian purposes, or to fulfil obligations relating to maintenance. The Public Prosecutor, again in agreement with the injured party, may postpone criminal prosecution if the conditions for discharging because of damage compensation regulated by the Criminal Code are met. The Public Prosecutor shall discharge the criminal charge against the perpetrator of a criminal offence if he/she fulfilled imposed obligations within a period not exceeding six months. Likewise, the Law on Criminal Procedure (Articles 146 and 146a) prescribes that the Public Prosecutor is not obliged to initiate a criminal procedure, or may give up from prosecuting if: It is stipulated in the Criminal Code that the court may release the perpetrator of the criminal offence, and if the Public Prosecutor, having in mind the actual circumstances of the case, deems that the verdict itself, without the criminal sanction, is not needed; The Criminal Code prescribes for the criminal offence a fine, or an imprisonment not exceeding three years, while the suspect, because of actual regret, prevented the occurrence of damaging consequences or has compensated the damage, and the Public Prosecutor, having in mind the actual circumstances of the case, deems that criminal sanction would not be justifiable; and The suspect, being a member of an organised group, gang or other criminal association, voluntarily collaborates before or after detecting a crime or during the criminal procedure, and if that collaboration and his statements are of great importance for detection of crimes and perpetrators. 