K. CUSTOMS COOPERATION 

1. Please provide information on legislation or other rules governing the customs area. 
Basic legal acts concerning the customs area in the Republic of Macedonia are the Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04) and the Law on Customs Tariff (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 23/03 and 69/04). The Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04), regulates the organisation, scope of activities, method of operating and managing of the Customs Administration, the customs competencies, as well as the rights and responsibilities when collecting, registering, processing and protecting the data related to the Customs Administration. This law regulates the specifics in regard to the rights, obligations and responsibilities of customs officers, the code of conduct, awards, promotions, as well as the financing of the Customs Administration. At the same time the Customs area is regulated by other customs related laws and by numerous by -laws, as well as by directly applicable international conventions (for more details see 25_II_13). Issues concerning customs cooperation are governed by a number of provisions within Chapter 3 – Section 2 (Responsibilities of the Customs Administration) of the Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04).   Namely, in accordance with Article 21, paragraph 2 of this Law, the Customs Administration cooperates and exchanges information with state administration bodies and other state authorities, as well as with public or private organisations. The types and procedures of customs cooperation with these bodies are regulated separately, by other provisions of this Law (from Article 18 to Article 22).  The issue of providing assistance for enforcement of the provisions of this Law, or other laws applied by the Customs Administration are subject to regulation with the Ministry of the Interior. Subject to regulation with the state administration bodies and other state authorities, is the issue of giving necessary assistance for implementation and enforcement of certain customs measures, reports on committed customs offences and criminal offences in the field of customs operation, as well as provision of information and documents . Also, the provisions of Article 22 of this Law, in accordance with the ratified international agreements, regulate the cooperation of the Customs Administration with the Customs Administration autorities of other countries in the field of customs operation - in the process of detection and prevention of customs and criminal offences, training of Customs officers, upgrading of technical development etc. On the other hand, the provisions of Article 138 of Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04) prescribe that state authorities are obliged to provide necessary assistance to the Courts and other relevant bodies, which participate in the criminal procedure, especially with respect to detecting crimes and their perpetrators. In this view, particularly significant is the provision incorporated in Article 142-a of the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04) which is establishing the responsibilities of the Customs Administration in the preliminary investigation procedure and in the investigation. Namely, the same powers which are given to the Ministry of the Interior are also given to the legally authorised officers from the Customs Administration in cases when they work on detecting crimes and their perpetrators and on collecting evidence for the purpose of criminal prosecution of perpetrators of criminal offences that are explicitly enumerated in this provision as well as other criminal offences related to export, import and transit of goods across the border line.  The co-operation of the Customs Administration with the Public Prosecutor’s Office and the investigative judge, as well as with state administration bodies, i.e. the Ministry of the Interior and the Financial Police, is elaborated in more details by other provisions from this Law, which regulate the preliminary investigation procedure and the investigation. This co-operation is regulated in particular with the provisions in Article 144-a of the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04) and Article 22 of the Law on Public Prosecutor’s Office (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 38/04). Pursuant to these provisions, in the preliminary investigation procedure and in the investigation related to crimes for which the prescribed sentence is imprisonment of at least four years; to crimes committed by several perpetrators; or when it is necessary because of especially justified reasons for efficient evidence gathering for the indictment, the Public Prosecutor may order one or more authorised officers from the respective Ministry or other state authority to be available to the Public Prosecutor’s Office for a specified time period, but not longer than one year. Pursuant to these legal provisions, the authorised officers act upon the orders and instructions of the Public Prosecutor and they are directly accountable to the Public Prosecutor for the performance of their tasks.  Article 2, paragraph 2 and Article 38 on the Law onMisdemeanours (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97 and 35/97) prescribe that for the misdemeanour procedure, the provisions of the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04) shall apply. Accordingly, the cooperation determined by the Law on Criminal Procedure also applies to the misdemeanour procedure.  Customs cooperation with other state administration bodies is also provided for in Article 53 of the Law on Organisation and Operation of the State Administrative Bodies (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 58/00 and 44/02). In accordance with these provisions, the state administration bodies, which are performing inspection tasks have a duty to cooperate between themselves, as well as with the other state administration bodies. 2. Does the Customs Administration have an integrated computer system? 
The Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia uses the Asycuda customs operation application for its customs information system (MAKCIS). The Asycuda application is  computerised customs management system developed by UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). The system contains most of the customs transit procedures, processes documents for inspection of goods, customs declarations, payment procedures, and provides confidential and punctual statistical data. The referential data are integrated within the system: harmonised tariff system, submitters, enterprises, currency and exchange rate, customs warehouses and all reference lists related to the SCD (Single Customs Document). The system has integrated the international standards and codes developed by the EU, World Customs Organisation and the UN. The system is configured according to the needs of the Macedonian legislation, to the necessary extent.  The Customs Administration is organised into five regions (Customs Houses), with a total of 43 customs offices, out of which 36 are currently linked with the computer network, while it is planned to link the other five customs branch offices with the Macedonian Customs Information System (MAKCIS) in the near future. MAKCIS implies a computerised customs branch office (CI), with LAN (Local Area Network) links with the local server on which Asycuda server application is installed. All the customs branch offices (CI) connected to MAKCIS are linked with the WAN (Wide Area Network) of the Customs Administration, which provides for data exchange. Data from all Customs Branch offices are collected at the central server through WAN, which serves for statistical processing, as well for further preparation of the statistical data for the needs of other state institutions. The process of reducing the number of servers in the customs branch offices (CI) has started, i.e. certain smaller customs branch offices (CI), are WAN linked to one server. At present time, a complete centralisation is not possible, mainly due to the unsatisfactory quality of the communication line provided by the two providers, and to lack of backup access. The users (customs officers and submitters) have access to the server application via personal computers on which the client Asycuda application is installed. The access to the server is provided via two physically separated LANs, one being for the submitters, and the other for the customs officers. Internet access for all customs branch offices (CI) has been provided from a central location via a single firewall protected link. The communication network of the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia uses modern network equipment that provides support for large number of transmission technologies and integration of multimedia services. The network is based on the IP protocol, which results in simplification of the administrator functions and reduces the burden of the network itself. In functional terms, the network provides access to Internet/Intranet, e-mail services, access to data at the central server and to each of the operational servers. The network for connection of border crossings is property of the Ministry of the Interior.  Direct participants in the MAKCIS are the public enterprises. Beside them direct participants are: the Public Enterprise for Airport Services “Macedonia”, the Public Enterprise - Macedonian Railways and the Public Enterprise for Postal Traffic – Macedonian Post. These participants submit to MAKCIS data on goods - subject to customs clearance and they have the possibility to check the customs procedure for the goods they handle or they guarantee. Furthermore, the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Resourse Management, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, the State Statistical Office and the Public Revenue Office are also users of the MAKCIS data in electronic format. There is no integrated computer system linking the Ministry of the Interior and the Customs Administration. However, should any of the services (Ministry of the Interior and Customs Administration) need information available to another service, the latter is ready to provide it at any time. 
3. Is there development of risk analysis using, inter alia, information derived from Memoranda of Understanding (MoU)? 
According to the mission of the Customs Administration aiming at accelerating customs procedures, and simultaneously enhancing its control function, as of 2002, the operation of the Customs Administration has been based on the Method of risk analysis and selectiveness. In this respect, there is a module within the existing customs information system (MAKCIS) based on the ASYCUDA system, which has been integrated in the customs branch offices. Furthermore, there are also selective controls at border crossing points supported by intelligence. The risk analysis and the establishment of criteria are based on the information received from the MAKCIS (the existing information system), the intelligence database, as well as on information from other units and services at the Customs Administration.   The risk management and the operative actions are under the responsibility of the Risk Analysis Unit within the Control and Investigations Sector.   Being result oriented, the Customs Administration puts special focus on cooperation with other institutions in the country and on international cooperation with the countries in the region.  The cooperation thus far, and the information exchange that are used in the risk analysis process are in compliance with Article 10, point 17 and Article 21 of the Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04), Article 11, point 9 of the Customs Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 21/98, 26/98, 63/98, 86/99, 25/00, 109/00, 31/01, 4/02, 55/02 and 42/03), and Article 3 of the Law on Internal Affairs (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 19/95, 55/97, 38/02, 33/03 and 19/04). The Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of the Interior and the Ministry of Finance (referring also to the Customs Administration) was signed in November 2004. With intention of improvement of the cooperation, Protocols will be signed based on the Memorandum of Understanding between the Ministry of the Interior and the Customs Administration. 4. What is done to ensure inter-agency co-operation and the implementation of mutual assistance agreements? 
Pursuant to Article 10, point 17, Article 21 of the Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04), Article 11, point 9 of the Customs Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 21/98, 26/98, 63/98, 86/99, 25/00, 109/00, 31/01, 4/02, 55/02 and 42/03), and Article 3 of the Law on Internal Affairs (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 19/95, 55/97, 38/02, 33/03 and 19/04) the cooperation and data exchange between the bodies of the state administration and other state autorities, as well as with the City of Skopje and the other municipal bodies is prescibed. The National Strategy for Integrated Border Management, which was adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in 2003, stipulates strengthening of the cooperation between the responsible Ministries. In practice, the cooperation between the Ministry of the Interior and the Customs Administration is successful both at central and local level. Pursuant to Article 8 of the Agreement on Cooperation to Prevent and Combat Trans-Border Crime (SECI) (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 16/00), a National Focal Point for mutual assistance in trans-border crime between the Ministry of the Interior and the Customs Administration, has been established within the Ministry of the Interior. A Guide for the National Focal Point has been prepared for this purpuse. The Customs Administration has its own officer at the National Focal Point who submits and receives requests from the SECI Regional Centre for Combating Trans-Border Crime.   In order to establish cooperation between the representatives from the Sector for Illicit Drug Trafficking within the Ministry of the Interior, the Border Police, the Control and Investigations Sector within the Customs Administration, under the patronage of EUPOL PROXIMA and the CAFAO-MAK mission, regular meetings have been held since August 2004. The purpose of these meetings is improvement and supporting the mutual cooperation with the aim of successful fight against illicit drug trafficking, shortening of information exchange procedures, supporting the mutual coordination on operational level, starting from the local sectors of every subject involved. 5. Does the Customs Administration have a special investigation service with sufficient resources? 
There is a Investigation Unit within the Customs Administration which functions within the Control and Investigations Sector. The basic responsibility of this Unit is preventing, detecting and revealing criminal acts and customs offences. The Unit cooperates with the competent services in the country for performance of the activities within its operational scope. Similarly, the Unit implements and directly participates in the cooperation with the foreign customs services and international organisations. The Investigation Unit directly participates in actions for detecting and documenting perpetrated criminal acts and customs offences and initiates legal procedures before the Court. Pursuant to the secondary legislation and through analysis of data which have been submitted by other Customs Administration services, as well as by other services, the Unit decides which cases will be subject of further investigation. The Unit follows the current trends or modus operandi for perpetrating criminal acts,  transportation of goods, illicit drug trafficking, trafficking in precursors, arms, excise goods and other commodities within the country and abroad. For implementation of these operating tasks the Investigation Unit has sufficient funds at its disposal, secured through the budget for each calendar year. These funds are sufficient basis for performing current activities, but funds for development are lacking. Moreover, the Unit uses various operational and technical means (vehicles, examination equipment, digital cameras, digital video-cameras, drug detection devices, trained customs dogs, dictaphones, etc.). Parts of those means are obtained as technical assistance through different European Union programmes. The customs inspectors will be armed with personal weapons in the near future. The Investigation Unit, apart from using the information system of the Customs Administration – MAKCIS and the database of the Intelligence Unit, has its own database of information and documented cases about perpetrated criminal acts and customs offences. 6. Are there adequate methods for the fight against fraud, including the introduction of mobile surveillance units? 
All the Sectors of the Customs Administration, and particularly the Control and Investigations Sector, ex officio are involved in the fight against fraud. Within this Sector, the following bodies are involved in detecting customs offences and criminal acts:    Coordination Centre   Analytical and Statistical Service   Control and Audit Unit   Control and Audit Service ( within the Control and Audit Unit)   Risk analysis Unit   Custom Intelligence Unit  Investigation Unit   Mobile Teams Unit At local level, within the Customs Houses, local intelligence officers and customs inspectors - auditors are assigned to perform duties within the Control and Investigations Sector.  Mobile teams operate for suppression of smuggling and act upon special plans, or necessity for increased surveillance of certain border crossings, or frequent roads, airports and customs terminals. For improved operability, the Mobile Teams Unit is organised in teams acting on the whole territory of the Republic of Macedonia. Additionally, there is a Rapid Interventions Taskforce (duty team). In particular cases, mixed teams from the Investigations and Intelligence Units and mobile teams are created, in order to execute specific actions, especially for cases of smuggling of prohibited goods, primarily narcotics and excise goods. Mobile teams are acting in coordination, i.e. together with police teams for operations on the regional level. The information system of the Customs Administration – MAKCIS is of a great assistance In detecting frauds, as well as the databases from the Intelligence and Investigation Units. Within the 24 hour Operational Centre there is an Open Customs Line for citisens to submit information on smuggling drugs, arms, goods, as well as to report corruption, 24 hours a day.  Pursuant to Article 24 of the Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04), the Customs are allowed to pay compensation for information that would help in detecting and preventing customs offences or criminal acts. The procedure upon detection of fraud depends on whether smuggling or fraud is detected during customs procedures - when the goods are still under customs surveillance, or in the means of transportation, i.e. when the fraud is detected during the procedure for additional control of the accounting records.  In case of detection of criminal acts and customs offences, the Investigation Unit is immediately informed in order to get involved into the investigation. The complete procedure is carried out by the Investigation Unit. The Control and Audit Unit has a special role in establishing faults or irregularities in the application of customs regulations, and pursuant to the Customs Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 21/98, 26/98, 63/98, 86/99, 25/00, 109/00, 31/01, 4/02, 55/02, and 42/03), performs control and supervision over all the participants in the customs procedure. The Control and Audit Unit takes appropriate measures and pursues procedures in accordance with responsibilities defined by Law, which in some cases end up with filing appropriate charges to the Public Prosecution Service or the first instance courts.   7. Please describe the training of customs officers. 
Upon the proposal of the Director of the Customs Administration, the Minister of Finance, in March, 2004 has adopted a Rulebook on Manner of Organisation of the Customs Administration and a Rulebook on Systematisation of Working Positions within the Customs Administration. Based on these documents, for the first time, the establishment of the Human Resources Management Sector is foreseen. This Sector carries out the activities from its scope of work through the Human Resources Unit, Training Unit and Advisory Unit.  The Training Unit is develops and updates strategic plan for trainings establishing the needs for improvement of knowledge and skills of the employees in the service, organises seminars, procedures for development and training of the employees, conducts assessment of the trainings, cooperates with the organisations and institutions in the country and abroad, keeps and updates records within its competence.  The uniformed Customs officers having special duties and authorisations comprise the biggest proportion of the employees with such status in the service. They are employed with secondary or university education. Only 4% of the employees of the Customs Administration have status of civil servants, and for them, the professional development is performed in accordance with the Law on Civil Servants (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 59/00, 112/00, 34/01, 103/01, 43/02, 98/02, 17/03, 40/03, 85/03, 17/04 and 69/04).  The professional development of the customs employees is performed through trainings, seminars and conferences. Beside the General customs course, the customs employees also attend specialised courses:    With the aim to provide more efficient performance at the border crossings that will enable more rapid flow of passengers and vehicles, trainings for primary and secondary inspection of passengers and vehicles are held for all the employees at the border crossing points. These trainings are carried out by the customs officers from the Customs Administration. From February to September 2004, trainings for the largest number of the employees within border branch offices were completed. 190 customs officers have participated at these trainings. A plan for carrying out this training for the rest two border crossing points has been drafted.    One-day trainings for handling the instruments for measuring radioactive radiation, organised by the Training Unit, have been held at some border crossing points where instruments for measuring the radioactive radiation are installed. In May 2004, trainings intended for 4 border crossing points were carried out by a trainer from the Customs Administration, where 65 customs employees have participated. A plan for conducting this training for the employees at the remaining 6 border crossing points where such instruments are installed has been prepared.  
Policy of trainings  
Supported by the Customs and Fiscal Assistance Office - CAFAO MAK and the bilateral international cooperation, the development of the In-service trainings is planned for fulfilment of the EU standards in this field.  Therefore, the Training Unit performs analysis for the needs of the training, which is a first step in the cycle of trainings, where a correct analysis determine the direction, the content and the structure of the trainings necessary for designing and structuring the training program. The design of the training programme enables the employees to acquire not only knowledge, but also skills and attitude necessary for performance of their working tasks. In order to enhance the development of the training system, there is already a trend of securing manager’s support. The managers have to recognise and establish the training needs, analyses and to forward them to the Training Unit. In this manner, they have to promote the principles of continuing education, to motivate the employees to develop themselves, to induce them to take the responsibility for their own development and to enable the employees to use part of their time as trainers or trainees.  The Training Unit already has a plan for establishment of introductory course aimed at introducing the newly employed personnel with the goals and structure of the Customs Administration, as well as with their rights and obligations. The Training Unit will revise the modules, content, time, schedule and the practical training within the general customs course, in order to provide more intense activities appropriate to relevant job needs.      The Training Unit has conducted an initial selection of the trainers by interviewing them, for the purpose of providing the Customs Administration with quality trainers that will satisfy certain higher standards and who besides the knowledge, will possess skills and talent to transfer those standards.  Furthermore, participation at the Train the Trainer’s module, carried out by a company from Skopje qualified for conducting such trainings has been provided for those who were selected during the interviewing procedure. 29 customs officers attended and completed this training for trainers. The Training Unit will provide a contract that will be concluded between the Director and the trainers, regarding the duration of the engagement and their rights and obligations.    The Training Unit, together with the trainers, will work on the development of national modules for internal trainings, individual and group types of training, type of on-the-job training by applying various methods and techniques which will deliver quality trainings.  The Training Unit keeps records on the trainings and on the conducted trainings of every employee, but an electronic support to this system should be provided and developed in order to obtain simpler updating and filling in this database.  The training process along with the trainers, are monitored and assessed with the aim to evaluate the effectiveness and to identify the necessary changes. The Training Unit specifies the goals and the criteria for assessment of the training.  Thus, the Training Unit is developing towards acquiring an advisory function. At the same time, the Training Unit tends to serve as a trainer, to prepare the national training modules and to assess and implement the established training standards. By conducting these activities, the Training Unit will contribute towards a comprehensive and independent support to the working strategy of the Customs Administration, on the whole, and will contribute towards improvement of the working performance of the employees and their development through training.  General vocational course for customs officers Training for total of 287 customs officers (132 with university education and 155 with secondary education) was conducted during the year 2000, organised by the Human Resources and Training Units for personnel and training.   Based on the General customs course programme in duration of 266 classes for the employees with university education, and 162 classes for the employees with secondary education, the following courses were encompassed: For the customs officers with university education:    Customs System and Procedure;    Goods familiarity;    Customs tariff;    Foreign trade and foreign currency operation;    Smuggling prevention with fundaments of psychology;   Working discipline and ethics; For the customs officers with secondary education:   Customs System and Procedure;    Goods familiarity;    Customs tariff;    Foreign trade and foreign currency operation;    Smuggling prevention with fundaments of psychology;   Working discipline and ethics; In 2002, the General customs course programme was reformed, and in the period of 2002-2004, there were 2 general customs courses organised, for total of 109 customs officers (71 with university education and 38 with secondary education). On the basis of the General customs course programme in duration of 216 classes intended for the employees with university education and 104 classes for the employees with secondary education, the following courses were encompassed: For the customs officers with university education:   Customs Law and Customs Procedures;    Customs tariff;    Customs value;    Origin of the goods;    Offences and criminal acts;   Measures of the trade policy;    Taxes and excises;   Computer system of the Customs Administration;    Smuggling prevention;    Work discipline and ethics; For the customs officers with secondary education:   Customs Law and Customs Procedures;   Customs value;    Offences and criminal acts;   Measures of the trade policy;   Taxes and excises;   Computer system of the Customs Administration;    Smuggling prevention;    Work discipline and ethics; The instructions are performed by the lecturers from the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia.  Calculation of the imported goods Thus far, for customs officers there were no trainings on control of the accounting of imported goods. Such trainings are planed for the forthcoming year.  Foreign languages The Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia, supported by the Embassy of France, organises classes in French languagefor its employees. Within the period between November 2003 and June 2004, 13 customs officers attended the classes and the French language education resumed from September to December 2004.  Courses on information technology  Within the framework of the Project “Trade and Transport Facilitation in South East Europe - Integrated Customs Information System (ICIS), the following trainings have been performed:    Computer training for "Windows Basics, S Office and Internet", carried out in the period between April 2001 and April 2002 intended for total of 332 customs officers within the Customs Administration and Customs House Skopje (179), Customs House Kumanovo (47), Customs House Gevgelija (36), Customs House Štip (31) and Customs House Bitola (39). The course were carried out by the Customs Administration in cooperation with a company authorised for implementation of IT trainings;   Training for trainers on creation of modules for training and additional documentation for Automatic System for Customs Data and Function for Software Development (ASYCUDA) - transit, selectiveness, forwarding and accounting module (18 participants, with the lecturers from United Kingdom);   IT training. 1.  Phase - Management with computer networks (basic phase) carried out in June 2001, in Skopje, and attended by 5 participants; 2. Phase – Telecommunications conducted in July 2001, in Skopje, attended by 9 participants; 3. Phase - Management with computer networks (advanced phase) carried out in July 2001, in Belgium, attended by 6 participants;   Training - "IT&C - Web Site"  for database management, internal instruments and mechanisms, web site design and development, performed in October 2001 in Skopje, attended by 7 participants;   Training "Case Tools" telecommunications, CASE (Computer Added System Engineering) instruments and IT methodologies, carried out in October and November 2001, in Skopje, attended by 4 participants; 
Other IT courses 
  Training on computer language – Oracle 9: Program with PL/SQL, a total of 5 days training was held in April 2003, in Skopje, attended by 1 participant from the Intelligence department within the Customs Administration;      Seminar on topic Win Days 2004, held in April 2004 in the Republic of Croatia, attended by 1 participant from the IT Sector;    For the needs of the employees of the Control and Investigations Sector and the Sector for Professional Responsibility, during May and July 2004, trainings for “Computer Skills” and “MAKCIS” have been held within the Customs Administration, in order to enable the customs officers to follow the progress of the information technology and more efficient application of the MAKCIS system in their daily operation. The lecturers performing the training were from the IT Sector within the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia. 
Counselling on actual issues in the customs system 
  For the purpose of correct implementation of the new Customs Law, the Law on Value Added Tax, and the Law on Excise, several “one day” seminars have been held in Customs House Kumanovo (18 participants), Customs House Skopje (36 participants), Customs House Gevgelija (15 participants), Customs House Bitola (20 participants), Customs House Štip (29 participants) during July 2001;    For the purpose of introducing the Law amending the Law on Customs Tariff , one day seminar for representatives from all the Customs Houses (39 participants) has been held by the Customs Administration in March 2002;    Conferences intended for customs officers and for other participants in the customs procedure, such as: importers, exporters, freight forwarders or transporters, if necessary, are organised when amendments of the regulation were introduced, or when estimated that there is a need to clarify certain actual issues in the field of customs operations. The last conference held in 2003 was dealing with the implementation of the customs clearance procedure, risk analyses, completion of transit procedure, re-export and simplified procedures.  Likewise, conferences were held on the implementation of the provisions of the Free Trade Agreements concluded by the Republic of Macedonia, as well as for the implementation of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, especially regarding the rules for origin;    Upon the accession of the Republic of Macedonia to the World Customs Organisation, in order to introduce all the customs employees with the latest amendments to the Law on Customs Tariff and to uniform and correct the classification of goods pursuant to the accession of the Republic of Macedonia to the World Customs Organisation, one day seminars were held across the Customs Houses. All the customs employees directly involved in customs tariff classification of goods have participated;       In May 2004, two daily seminars on topic “Acting upon TIR Convention” were held in Skopje and Bitola for total of 110 customs officers.  
Training on use of means of coercion and carrying and using firearms  Article 44 of the Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04) stipulates that the customs officers in performing their competences may use means of coercion. They may carry and use firearms in cases determined by this Article.  The Government of the Republic of Macedonia, upon the proposal of the Minister of Finance, prescribes in details the use of means of coercion, as well as the carrying and use of firearms by the customs officers. Following the adoption of this act, courses on the use of means of coercion, as well as training on carrying and using firearms are planned in cooperation with the Ministry of the Interior.  Commercial fraud methods 
  Seminar for commercial frauds was held in May 2002; Attended by 16 participants under the auspices of the World Customs Organisation;   Seminar for money laundering and international banking was held in October 2003 in Skopje; Attended by 4 customs officers;   Two seminars for prevention of the financial crime were held by the US Agency for International Development (USAID) in March 2004; 4 customs officers participated; One day seminar on money laundering prevention was held in April 2004 and 7 customs civil servants participated;    Two days training on money laundering prevention was organised by the Directorate for Money Laundering prevention in June 2004 where 2 customs officers participated;    One day seminar on the topic “Coordination of the activity between the competent bodies for implementation of the measures and activities” regulated with the Law on Prevention of Money Laundering and other Proceeds from Crime (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04) was held in October 2004; 2 customs officers participated. 
Seminars on anti-smuggling 
  A basic training for two drug detection dogs and two handlers of dogs was held in Germany under UNDCP and FARE project - In the period between April and May 2000 (first part) and between August and September 2000 (second part) a basic training for authorised officers - handlers of dogs for detection of heavy drugs was held in Germany; The third part  (re-dressage) was held in March and April 2001 also;   Within the joint UNDCP and FARE programme, training for control of passengers, luggage and cargo deliveries at the airports was held in June 2000. 17 officers participated;   Training for prevention and detection of illegal trafficking in precursors (Ministry of the Interior and Drug Enforcement Agency) was held in November 2000. 8 customs officers participated;   UNDP and FARE Project - Training on correct use of technical devices for detection of narcotic drugs and other smuggled goods (RAD REFLEX) was held in Bulgaria in May 2001. 2 participants attended;      During 2001 and 2002, three trainings for fight against smuggling and illegal drug trade were organised by the Customs Administration. 39 participants attended;    International Workshop for prevention, fight against illegal trade with small calibre and light weapon in South East Europe was held in September 2002. Attended by 1 participant;    One day trainings for handling the instruments Vapor Tracer 2 - analysers of narcotics and explosives were held in May 2003 and in January 2004. Attended by 14 participants;    Training for drug identification was carried out by an international police expert from the OSCE Police Training Unit in October 2003. Attended by 31 participants from the Customs Administration;     Seminar for fight against dissemination of weapons of mass destruction was held in June 2003 in Hungary. Attended by 1 participant from the Intelligence Department;    During 2003, total of 11 trainings were organised by the Customs and Fiscal Assistance Office CAFAO MAK, and during 2004, total of 3 trainings were organised for the Customs Intelligence Unit, the Investigations Unit, Mobile Teams Unit and the Duty Operational Centre within the Control and Investigation Sector. These seminars were attended by 58 customs officers.  
8. Which measures are taken to ensure the integrity of customs officers and prevent corruption? 
The work of the customs officers is based on the Constitution (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01 and 84/03), relevant laws and other regulations. The customs officers are conducting the custom service matters in compliance with general principles of customs competences envisaged in Article 12 of the Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04), and in complience with the competencies of the Customs officers stipulated in Article 26 of the abovementioned law, as well as with the Rulebook for Systematisation of Working Positions in the Customs Administration. Article 58 of the Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04), defines the general obligations of the customs officers. Thus, the customs officers are obliged to perform their working assignments conscientiously, professionally, efficiently, orderly and timely, impartially and without external influences, personal financial interests. Also they have to refrain from abusing of their authorisations and of the Customs officer status and to protect the reputation of the Customs Administration. They execute the orders of their immediate superior in compliance with the Constitution, the legal acts and other relevant regulations. The Customs officers, upon request by the citizens, interested parties and public institutions provide information required to exercise their rights and interests. Classified and confidential information are not being provided for this purpose. The Customs officers shall not use privileges and immunities and shall not request nor accept material or other gifts for fulfilling their duties.  The Customs officers are obliged to comply with all the security measures applied; they are obliged to behave in accordance with the Code of Conduct and the prescribed rules on order and discipline of the Customs Administration, which are envisaged with the Collective Agreement for Labour Relations in the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia, No. 01 - 1984/1 (17.03.2003). Pursuant to the obligations of the Collective Agreement, the custom officers are signing a Statutory Declaration that they “are introduced to the provisions of the Collective Agreement and shall conscientiously, orderly and responsibly perform the working tasks assigned, complying with the Constitution, the Laws and with the other regulations and that they shall not participate in bribe and corruption, nor shall tolerate such behaviour as for other employees of the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia”.  The signed Declaration is kept in the Custom’s officer personal file.  The Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04) for the first time envisages the basis that will provide for undertaking measures by the Customs Administration in interest of ensuring the integrity of the customs officers and prevention of the corruption, such as:   For the persons employed for the first time by the Customs Administration as a customs officers, it is envisaged to give and sign a prescribed oath in front of the Director. The signed oath is kept in the personal file. If a customs officer refuses to give and sign the oath, it shall be deemed that a decision for employment is not made.   In the process of recruitment as a customs officer, the Director may request data on a person from competent state institution authorised for maintaining security data, on the existence of obstacles threatening the security of the operation of the Customs Administration.   The contract for establishing labour relation will be signed, after a healthcare institution which is recognised by the Customs Administration determines that the candidate for customs officer meets the relevant health standards for performing the tasks on the working position.    Regarding the customs officer who has an employment contract and who does not perform his working assignments satisfactory and when he/she has been away from work for a longer period, or his/her health is questionable, or similar circumstances exist, the director may decide to instruct the customs officer to undergo a medical examination at an official medical institution designated for that purpose;   Prohibition on performing external activities, i.e. the customs officers may not perform any other profit-making function, duty or activity which is in conflict with their official duty.  This ban relates to customs officers as owners or partners in trade companies, members of a board of the directors or of supervisory authorities of trade companies, as well. The customs officers are disciplinary liable if they act contrary to this ban; The Customs Administration drafted an Operational Instruction with description of the work and activities that are in conflict with the official duties of the customs officers, and that must not be performed by the customs officers.  In this Operational Instruction other matters and activities are also described, that are not in conflict with official duty, and also under which conditions and in which cases may be performed by the customs officers, i.e. only upon submitted request and obtained written approval by the Director of the Customs Administration. This Instruction is binding for all customs officers, inclusive of highest managerial staff. With regars of transparency and the determination of the Customs Administration for providing implementation of the Operational Instruction, it shall be distributed to each employee demanding signing of a Declaration for introduction. The rules for working discipline prescribe an obligation for the Head of the organisational unit in cases when violation of working discipline is determined or for non-fulfilment of the working assignments, to initiate a procedure for establishing the liability of the customs officer by submitting a proposal.  This rule applies entirely in all cases of established violation of working discipline or non-fulfilment of working assignments and is a part of an established practice of disciplinary procedures within the Customs Administration. The training of newly recruited customs officers on the module, the work discipline and the ethics represents a prevention measure for ensuring the integrity, moral behaviour of the customs officers and suppression of corruption. This training has been carried out since 1998 (91 participants). In the year 2000 (287 participants), 2002 (90 participants) and in 2004 (19 participants). In view of ensuring the integrity of the customs officers and preventing corruption, the Customs Administration has introduced an additional part of the official uniform - the ID card with a duty for carrying it, as a possibility for identification of a customs officer who improperly performs its duty or misconducts. In that direction, the Customs Administration is transparent and open for the public by conducting regular reporting for the regulations, the current problems in the service, the activities that are undertaken for overcoming them and the results achieved. The Customs Administration has established practice of publishing information on Internet. Regular panels and press-conferences are also carried out. The established system of regular meetings with the trade groups (customs brokers, forwarding agents (logistics agents), carriers, importers, exporters and commercial chambers) should be emphasised.  All measures that are undertaken to ensure the integrity of customs officers and to prevent the corruption have contributed for introducing the working differentiation. In view of ensuring the integrity of the customs officers and preventing corruption, in 2003, a new Organisation unit with such function within the Customs Administration was introduced, i.e. the Sector for Professional Standards with two Departments: Department for Internal Inspection and Internal Investigations Department. The Sector for Professional Responsibilities is under direct jurisdiction of the Director of the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia. In May 2004, the staffing of the Sector for Professional Responsibilities began upon the initiative of the Director of the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia. A training particularly intended for the needs of the Sector for Professional Responsibilities was carried out by foreign experts in June and August 2003, and in September 2004.     The mission of the Sector for Professional Responsibilities is:   to act preventive, to detect and eliminate non-professional conduct, frauds, losses, abuses, corruption and mal-governance, in fact, all deviant conducts listed in Article 123 of the Collective Agreement for Labour Relations in the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia;   to perform control over all introduced functions in the Sectors within the Customs Administration and Customs Houses, from the viewpoint of their enforcement in compliance with the law, prescribed procedures, competencies, working assignments, rights and duties, as well as investigation of allegedly improper conduct by the employees (employees in uniform, authorised officials, employees with civil servants status and persons without a status of civil servant);   In terms of the abovementioned, the Sector for Professional Responsibilities collects information on illegal conduct of the customs officers through the 24 hour Operational Centre, i.e. the OPEN TELEPHONE LINE for citizens’ complaints on the work of customs officers - 197, which was established on 27.11.2003. As of 31.11.2004 inclusive, there were 349 registered calls of citizens regarding corruption of customs officers. This project was financed by the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.  The Sector for Professional Responsibilities also receives information from the Control and Investigations Sector, uses various techniques of monitoring and surveillance in accordance with law and develops confidential contacts with the subject that is participanting in the customs procedure.  The Sector for Professional Responsibilities prepares official reports on the basis of collected facts and evidences.   This Sector also prepares Official notes for internal use and Official information for communication with the Director, as a support for the assertions for committed customs offence, thereby strictly taking care for the moral integrity of the customs officer personality and not violating their human rights.  Following the obtained approval by the Director, such Official information through the Sector for Human Resources Management is being delivered to the first superior - the Customs House Manager, who is competent for initiation of the disciplinary procedure. The proposal for initiating a disciplinary procedure is submitted to the Director, who further processes the proposal to the disciplinary commission. 9. What internal disciplinary procedures exist? 
The uniformed customs officers or officers with special duties and authorisations can be found disciplinary responsible for three types of violations:   Violation of working discipline due to a failure in performing official duties and assigned operations or a failure to abide by general obligations;   Unsatisfactory work results;   Lack of knowledge and skills for carrying out the work, pursuant to the Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04), Law on Labour (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 80/93, 3/94, 14/95, 53/97, 59/97, 21/98, 25/00, 34/00, 50,01, 25/03 40/03 and 80/03 consolidated text) and the Customs Collective Labour Agreement.  For the employees who have a status of a civil servant at the Customs Administration, the Law on Civil Servants (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 59/00, 112/00, 34/01, 103/01, 43/02, 98/02, 17/03, 40/03, 85/03, 17/04 and 69/04) applies to their rights, obligations and responsibilities. 1. Disciplinary procedure for violation of working discipline due to a failure in performing official duties and assigned operations, as well as failure to abide to general obligations. The Customs Administration Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 46/04) defines general obligations of the customs officers. In the Collective Labour Agreement of the Customs Administration, concluded on 17 March 2003 between the Union of the Customs Administration and the Customs Administration, signed by the President of the Union and the Director of the Customs Administration, a Code of Conduct for Customs Officers is attached, defining 57 cases of behaviour that might be a subject to disciplinary measures, including the termination of employment by dismissal. The Code explains the meaning of improper conduct and subsequent sanctions. Every employee of the service is informed about the Code, signs a statement that he/she is familiar with it, and the statement is kept in the personal record. The proposal for initiating a procedure is under the jurisdiction of a Senior Manager who is obliged to initiate a procedure, if during the regular supervision of the subordinates’ work an irregularity is determined. The disciplinary procedure may be initiated by the Sector for Professional Responsibilities, as well as on the basis of calls to the Open Line 197 for cases of crime, corruption and other types of customs abuse.  The Customs Administration has established permanent contacts with the Courts and the Law enforcement bodies, as well as with the Ministry of the Interior, focused on the information exchange about employees under suspicion of committed illegal activities during office or in connection with their official duties. After the completion of the investigations in the appropriate Department, the information is forwarded to the Senior Manager for initiating a disciplinary procedure.  In such cases, additional to the disciplinary procedure, a procedure before the Court is initiated for establishing criminal liability of the customs officer. The Customs Administration has established records on initiated disciplinary procedures. The Disciplinary Commission formed by the Director represents a competent body for conducting disciplinary procedures against uniformed customs officers or officers with special duties and responsibilities. A representative of the Union is present during the disciplinary procedure and he submits a written opinion, when the procedure is completed.  During the disciplinary procedure, the customs officer is entitled to a legal assistance by the Union or by another person. The Disciplinary Commission establishes the responsibility of the employee and submits a written proposal to the Director. If the customs officer brings an appeal against the Director’s decision, a Second Instance Commission within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia issues a decision on the case. Upon the decision of this Commission, a court protection before the competent court is also foreseen. Customs officers may be suspended from their duties at the Customs Administration if there is a grounded suspicion that they have abused their job; in cases when a criminal procedure for a criminal act perpetrated at work or in connection with the job is initiated; if they are sentenced to prison; if they directly endanger the life and the health of the employees or other persons or cause damage to assets with greater value; if their presence at work and continuation of the work would cause damage to the operations of the Customs Administration; if they obstruct or prevent establishing responsibility for violation of the working obligations. The suspended customs officers must turn over their official ID, the official personnel seal, the uniform and other equipment entrusted for carrying out their duties. The suspension is effective for the duration foreseen for the cause of suspension i.e. the duration of the criminal and/or disciplinary procedure. During the period of suspension, the customs officer receives 60% of the salary base, and in case of returning to their post, he/she is compensated for the difference to the full amount of the salary. 2. Disciplinary procedure for unsatisfactory work results  If an employee shows unsatisfactory results during the ongoing month, the senior manager prepares a report on his unsatisfactory work and presents it to the employee with a written notice and warning to improve his work in the following month. If the employee does not improve the work results in the following 30 days, and there are no justifications for such behaviour, a written and elaborated report is prepared for initiating a procedure for establishing responsibility. The proposal is submitted to the employee, who is obliged to answer to it. The proposal is also submitted to the Union of the Customs Administration, and a written opinion is requested. The complete file is submitted to the Director, who initiates the disciplinary procedure. 3. Disciplinary procedure for lack of knowledge and skills for carrying out work If equal working conditions are provided to an employee as to other employees with similar working posts and duties, and if the senior manager monitoring the employee’s work assesses that he/she does not have appropriate knowledge and skills, the senior manager notifies the employee of initiating a procedure for checking his knowledge and skills necessary for the relevant job. The notification is also submitted to the branch of the Union. The employee has the right to have an insight into the procedure and to ask for clarification. The senior manager submits the complete documentation to the Director of the Customs Administration who forms a Commission for evaluating the employee’s skills. After the evaluation is done by the Commission, the Director brings forth an appropriate decision. The Customs Administration regularly informs the public about the initiated procedures and the disciplinary measures taken upon them. III. There are two types of disciplinary measures in the Customs Administration: 
  Termination of employment with dismissal;   Fine in the amount of 15 % from the monthly salary of the employee in the duration of 1 to 6 months. The Director of the Customs Administration may replace the employee's dismissal with a fine depending on the customs officer’s degree of responsibility, the conditions under which the violation of working obligations has been done, the previous work and behaviour of the customs officer, the seriousness of the violation and its consequences. To those employees in the Customs Administration that have a civil servant status, the disciplinary procedure is pursued in accordance with the Law on Civil Servants (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 59/00, 112/00, 34/01, 103/01, 43/02, 98/02, 17/03, 40/03, 85/03, 17/04 and 69/04). For more details see answer I_C_6.   
10. Are any statistics available on the number and type of disciplinary cases that have been undertaken in the last 3 years? 
The Human Resources Unit keeps records on disciplinary procedures since the establishment of the Customs Administration. These statistical data serve as basis for preparing reports and analysis. A total of 208 disciplinary procedures have been initiated in the last 3 years. 44 cases have resulted in termination of employment with dismissal, 120 with fines, and in 36 cases the disciplinary procedure was terminated, or the proposal for disciplinary procedure was dismissed. Breakdown of types of penalties delivered: 2001  Disciplinary measures Cases Termination of employment with dismissal Fines:  30 % salary reduction  in duration of 1 month 15% salary reduction  in duration of 1 month 12 10%  salary reduction  in duration of 1 month 15%  salary reduction  in duration of 6 months 
Total fines: 23 Total of initiated disciplinary procedures: 28 Job suspension  

2002  Disciplinary measures Cases Termination of employment with dismissal 11 Fines:  15% salary reduction in duration of 3 months 15% salary reduction in duration of 6 months 
Total fines: 
Total of initiated disciplinary procedures: 27 Job suspension 

2003  Disciplinary measures Cases Termination of employment with dismissal 22 Fines:  15% salary reduction in duration of 1 month 15%  salary reduction in duration of 2 months 15%  salary reduction in duration of 3 months 15%  salary reduction in duration of 6 months 61 Total fines: 76 Terminated disciplinary procedure or dismissed proposal for disciplinary procedure 15 Total of initiated disciplinary procedures: 113 Job suspension 

2004  Disciplinary measures Cases Termination of employment with dismissal Fines:  15% salary reduction in duration of 3 months 15% salary reduction in duration of 6 months 
Total fines: 13 Terminated disciplinary procedure or dismissed proposal for disciplinary procedure 21 Total of initiated disciplinary procedures: 40 Job suspension   


