B. DATA PROTECTION 

1. Please provide information on legislation or other rules governing the area of data protection in your country, and your adhesion to relevant international conventions. 
The right to privacy regarding the processing of personal data, as one of the fundamental freedoms and rights of the individuals and the citizens in the Republic of Macedonia is regulated  in the Article 18 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos 52/91, 01/92, 31/98, 91/01, 84/03), which guarantees security and privacy of personal data and protection from possible violation of the personal integrity of the citizens deriving from registration of personal information through data processing. In the legislation of the Republic of Macedonia, the constitutional guarantee of security and privacy of the personal data until recently was governed by the Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 12/94 and 4/02). The new Law on Personal Data Protection was adopted on 25.01.2005 (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05). This law is compatible and aligned with the standards and the criteria foreseen by the European Parliament and the European Council Directive on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of such Data 95/46/ of 1995 and the Convention for the Protection of Individuals with Regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data No. 108 of the Council of Europe of 28.01.1981 ratified by the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05). The substance of the Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05) is divided into 11 separate chapters. Chapter 1 - General Provisions, defines the subject and the aim of the law, which is focused on protection of fundamental rights and freedoms of the citizens, with a special emphasis on protection of rights to privacy regarding personal data processing. In drafting the provisions systematised within this chapter, the Constitutional guarantee of security and privacy of personal data and protection from violation of the personal integrity of the citizens (Article 18) was taken into consideration. The legal definitions strictly follow the terminology used in the Directive 95/46/Consistently incorporating the contents from Article 3 from the Directive 95/46/, the Law explicitly identifies the exceptions from its application, focused on processing of personal data performed by natural persons purely for personal or household activities, processing of personal data in criminal procedure, as well as protection of the interests of security and defence of the Republic of Macedonia (Article 4). Chapter 2 of the Law on Personal Data Protection - Processing of Personal Data, specifies the conditions which the personal data should meet. When defining the aforementioned provision, the starting point was the content of the Article 6 from the Directive 95/46/, where the principles concerning the quality of personal data are established. Hence, the personal data shall be processed fairly and lawfully, in conformity with the Law. This data shall be collected for specified, explicit and legitimate purposes and shall be processed in a manner according to these purposes; they shall be adequate, relevant and not excessive in respect to the purposes they are collected or processed for. The data shall be accurate, complete and updated as needed. Inaccurate or incomplete data, having in mind the aims for which they were collected or processed, will be erased or rectified. The personal data shall be kept in a form that enables identification of the subject of personal data for not longer than it is necessary to fulfil the purposes for which the data were collected or for which they are further processed. The Data Controllers are responsible to comply with the abovementioned principles concerning the quality of personal data.  The Law on Personal Data Protection establishes the principles of making data processing legitimate. Previously given consent of the subject for processing of personal data is established as a mandatory and necessary prerequisite for processing of personal data. Exceptions from the aforementioned rule are also specified. Namely, it is established that personal data can also be processed without the consent of the subject if it is necessary for performance of a contract where the subject of personal data is a contracting party, or upon a request of the subject of personal data, prior to entering into a contract; for compliance with a legal obligation of the Data Controller; for protection of the vital interests of the subject of personal data; for performance of activities of public interest or of official authority vested in the Data Controller or a third party to whom the data were disclosed.  The chapter 3 - Processing of special categories of personal data, implements the relevant provisions contained in the Directive 95/46/. The Law prohibits processing of special categories of personal data. This prohibition shall not apply: if the subject of personal data gives consent to processing of these data; for enforcement of specific rights and obligations of the Data Controller in the area of Labour Law, to a degree and with adequate safeguards established by laws in this area; for protection of the vital interests of the subject of personal data or of a third person, if that person is physically or legally incapable of giving his/her consent; if the processing is performed with appropriate guarantees by foundations, associations or any other non-profit institutions with a political, religious, trade-union or other purpose, under condition that the data processing is related solely to their members and that these data are not disclosed to a third party without the consent of the subject of personal data; if the processing relates to data which are manifestly made public by the data subject; when it is necessary to establish, exercise and defend the rights of the subject in a procedure before competent bodies; if the processing of the data is for purposes of medical prevention, diagnosis, provision of care or treatment or management of a healthcare organisation and if the processing of those data is performed by a health professional subject who is under oath of professional secrecy; and when for reasons of public interest there is a need to perform an important activity established by law, or the processing is done on the basis of a decision by the Directorate for Personal Data Protection. The Law on Personal Data Protection stipulates that processing must be specially designated and protected, while transfer through a telecommunications network may be carried out if the data are specially protected with encryption methods to render them unreadable during transmission. This chapter also determines the conditions under which the personal identification number may be processed. Chapter 4 - Rights of the Data subject, is central in the draft law. This chapter makes a distinction between the information presented to the subject of personal data in cases of collection of data from the data subject and information presented to the subject of personal data where the data have not been obtained from the data subject. The rights of the data subject have been arranged by subject matter, as follows: the right to examine the data collection; the right to submit a request to rectify, erase or block the processing of personal data, if the data are incomplete, inaccurate or out of date, or if their processing is not in conformity with the provisions of this law and the right to request that their personal data are not used for advertising purposes. The Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05) explicitly provides that the scope of the rights and obligations of the subject of personal data established by provisions of this Law can be restricted in a way and under conditions established by law, to an extent necessary to fulfil aims due to which this restriction is introduced and if it is needed: for protection of the national security and defence; for prevention; investigation, detection or prosecution of perpetrators of criminal offences; because of breaches of the ethics for regulated professions; for protection of important economic and financial interests of the state and for protection of a subject of personal data or the rights and the freedoms of the citizens.  The content of Article 15 of Directive 95/46/, is incorporated in a special provision of the Law, which guarantees that no court decision which produces legal effects concerning the performance of certain person can not be based solely on automated data processing which purpose is evaluation of certain personal aspect relating to that person. While the paragraph 2 of the same provision specifies that another decision can be based only on automated data processing if it is made in the course of entering into a performance of a  contract and the person was provided the opportunity to express his point of view (to safeguard his legitimate interests) or the decision was made in concordance with the request of that person or in accordance with a law which lays down measures to safeguard the data subject’s legitimate interests. The chapter 5 - Confidentiality and protection in processing of personal data, contains provisions which specify the duties of any person who has access to collections of personal data on the behalf of the Data Controller or the Data Processing Agent, including the Data Processing Agent, to provide for confidentiality, protection of personal data and to process the data in accordance with the authorisations and instructions received from the Data Controller, if not otherwise prescribed by law. For providing confidentiality and protection of processing of personal data, the Data Controller must implement appropriate technical and organisational measures and these measures must correspond to the equipment and costs needed for their application. Therefore they shall ensure a level of security appropriate to the risks represented by the processing and the nature of the data to be protected. The list of technical and organisational measures which are applied by the Data Controller pursuant to the Law is extensive and complex, in order to provide comprehensive protection of personal data from all potential forms of unlawful processing. On the basis of a signed contract, the Data Controller can transfer certain activities from within his/her competence to the Data Processing Agent, if the Data Processing Agent guarantees that they will undertake and respect adequate technical security and organisational measures for protection of data processing. The Data Processing Agent has the duty, when processing the personal data, to act in accordance with authorisations and instructions received from the Data Controller and in accordance with provisions of this Law. The Data Controller has the duty to maintain records on the undertaken technical and organisational measures, as well as on the signed contracts.  The provisions in chapter 6 - Records of collections of personal data and central register, establish the content and manner for keeping records on any collection of personal data, an obligation of Data Controller to notify the Directorate for Protection of Personal Data before performing wholly or partly automatic processing operation and an obligation of the Data Controller to submit data on any newly opened collection of personal data, as well as change of data from the existing personal data collections. The records from the Central Register kept by the Directorate are publicly accessible and they are published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia.  The chapter 7 - Transfer of personal data to other countries, specifies that a transfer of personal data to another countries can be performed only if the third country provides an adequate level of protection of personal data. There is a precise enumeration of the circumstances assessed by the Directorate for protection of personal data before performing a transfer of personal data to a third country.  If the country where the data from the collection of personal data should be transferred does not provide an adequate degree of protection of personal data, the Directorate will not authorise the transfer. The Law specifies the cases where by exception a transfer of personal data to a third country is performed, if the other country to which the data should be transferred does not provide an adequate degree of protection.  The chapter 8 - Making personal data available to users, contains provisions which are regulating the substance related to making personal data available to users, as well as exchange of personal data between state bodies. It is established that the Data Controller can make personal data available on the basis of a written request submitted by the user, if the data are needed to perform activities within the legally established scope of competencies of the user. It provides a prohibition on providing personal data whose processing, i.e. use cannot be carried out in accordance with the provisions of this Law and if the purpose for requesting such personal data is in accordance with specific, clear and lawful purposes for which personal data is collected. The chapter 9 of the Law, dealing with the Establishment and responsibilities of the Directorate for Protection of Personal Data, defines the Directorate for Protection of Personal Data, as an independent supervisory authority, performing control over the legality of of processing of personal data. For more details see answer 24_B_03.  The chapter 10 - Penal Provisions contains provisions which prescribe misdemeanour sanctions in case of violation and inconsistent enforcement of provisions of this Law. For committed misdemeanours, fines as the only sanction for the perpetrators (natural and legal persons) are prescribed. Fines are prescribed within the scope established in the Law on Misdemeanours (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97 and 35/97). Chapter 11 - Transitional and Final Provisions, lay down the timeframe for appointing a Director of the Directorate for Protection of Personal Data (six months), as well as a timeframe for the Directorate to adopt the secondary legislation provided for with this Law (six months). The natural and legal persons processing personal data must align their work within two years from adopting the secondary legislation. Besides the basic Law which governs personal data protection, this area is subject to regulation in a number of other laws.  The Law on Organisation and Operation of State Administrative Bodies (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 58/00 and 44/02) provides that state administrative bodies do not disclose data related to the national security, official and business secret, as well as personal data of citizens in accordance to the Law which governs protection of personal data of citizens. The constitutional guarantee of protection of personal data is also regulated by the Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 37/96, 80/99, 4/02, 43/03 and 19/04). Given the need for protection of the data subject, in Chapter 15, Crimes Against the Rights and Freedoms of Human Beings and Citizens, the criminal act “abuse of personal data” has been introduced. The legal essence of this criminal offence consists of a prescribed fine or prison sentence of up to one year for the perpetrator who, contrary to conditions established by law and without the consent of the citizen, collects,  processes or uses their personal data. The same fine is provided for the person who will penetrate into the computer information system of personal data with the intention to use the data for him/herself or another person in order to gain benefit or to cause harm to another person. The criminal offence abuse of personal data has an aggravated form if the mentioned criminal offence is committed by officials in carrying out their duty, where a prison sentence of three months to three years is provided. Taking into account the particular danger of the abovementioned crimes for the freedoms and rights of human beings and citizens, it is prescribed that the attempt for committing such a crime is also punishable. Legal persons can also be perpetrators of the primary form of this crime, consequently being punished with a fine. The criminal sanctions established in the Criminal Code can be pronounced to a perpetrator of the mentioned criminal offence under the conditions determined in the Criminal Code and on the basis of a legally executed criminal procedure in accordance with the Law on Criminal Procedure (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 15/97, 44/02 and 74/04). The Law on Voter’s List (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 42/02 and 35/04), determines the personal data contained in the voter’s list. The list contains the following data: the personal identification number of the citizens, their surname, the name of one of the parents, their name, gender, permanent address (municipality, area of residence, street, house number, entrance number and apartment number), date of registration and deletion and date and type of data amendment. The above personal data are protected in accordance with the Law on Personal Data Protection and they must not be used for any other purpose, except for exercising citizens’ voting right in accordance with the Law on Voter’s List. Any citizen may, within the period determined with this law, file a request for registering, amending or deleting data in the copies of the voter’s list provided for public inspection if they or any other citizen are not registered in it; if a person is registered who does not have the right to vote or does not reside in the area of the municipality, or a person who has passed away, and if the personal name and address of the person or the personal name and address of another person have been inaccurately entered. Copies of the voter’s list, with data related to the ordinal number, surname, name, gender, date of birth and address, are provided to registered political parties and to independent candidates.          Basic personal data on citizens is recorded in the Registry of Births, Marriages and of Deaths. In accordance with the Law on Personal Identification Records (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 08/95 and 38/02), registry books are kept, protected and used in accordance with law. The original copy, the certificate from a registry, as well as a transcript or a copy for entry in a registry, are issued upon request of the person to whom the data in those documents refer. The documents are also issued to a concerned party, i.e. a legal entity or body when there is legal interest established by law. The person to whom the data relates or another interested person, where there is direct legal interest established by law, have the right to inspection of registries or the documents and decisions upon which entries are made in the registries. The Law on Reporting Dwellings and Residence of Citizens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 12/93 and 43/00) establishes that the Ministry of the Interior provides protection from unauthorised access and use of the data contained in the records on the dwelling, change of home address and residence of the citizens. The personal data on asylum seekers, recognised refugees and persons under humanitarian protection, the data on their residence and the rights they enjoy in the Republic of Macedonia are contained in the Central Collection of Data, established, processed and used by the Ministry of the Interior (Asylum Section). The above collection of data is established, processed and used by the person handling the collection in accordance with the provisions of the Law on Personal Data Protection. In accordance with the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/03), the data from the Central Collection of Data cannot be exchanged with the country of origin of the person to whom such data relates or with the country of origin of the members of their family. In order to execute the decision for expelling from the territory of the Republic of Macedonia a person whose asylum request has been irrevocably denied or whose right to asylum in the Republic of Macedonia has been terminated with an irrevocable decision, the Asylum Section may exchange the following data with the competent authorities of other countries: The name and surname, date and place of birth, gender, citizenship, last residence and home address, data on the number of family members and on the documents issued by the country of origin; and fingerprints and a photograph;    The personal identification number of the citizen is a unique designation on the identification documents of the citizen. In accordance with the Law on Personal Identification Number (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 36/92), the Ministry of the Interior designates a personal identification number to the citizen according to the place of registration of the newborn child in the Registry of Births kept on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. The Ministry of the Interior provides the keeping, use and protection of the data from unauthorised access in accordance with law.  Law enforcement officers, in accordance with the Code of Police Ethics (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 03/04), are obliged to adhere to the citizens’ right to privacy in accordance with the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Macedonia. Collecting, keeping and using personal data by the police is performed in accordance with law and the ratified international agreements for protecting personal data, restrictively and in the extent necessary for carrying out legal duties. The police objectively inform the public of their activities, in accordance with the principles of confidentiality of data (observed for protecting the personal integrity of citizens, observing the principle of presumption of innocence, as well as for conducting a criminal procedure, etc.). Therefore,  professional procedures for relations with the media are established.  The Law on Classified Information (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 9/04) establishes the measures and activities for protecting classified information. The measures and activities for security of individuals i.e. issuing a security certificate, have a special place among the stated measures and activities. The satisfaction of the conditions for issuing a security certificate is established through a security audit carried out upon previous written consent of the person to whom a security certificate is to be issued. The data from the completed security questionnaire are used for the purposes of the audit.       The Law on State Statistics (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 54/97) regulates the protection of individual data (of natural or legal persons) collected and processed for statistical purposes. The existing law establishes the meaning of the expressions used and their protection. The individual data related to a legal or natural person, collected and processed for statistical purposes are confidential data and they can be used as separate data for statistical purposes only. Access to the above data may be provided for statistical purposes only and, by exception, for scientific purposes (without the identification data about the data subject). The quoted law underlines that individual data cannot be separately used to make any decisions concerning the person they relate to. When publishing statistical data or preparing them, upon the request of users, the data are published, i.e. prepared in a form preventing the identification of the subject of the data, unless the subject of the data has agreed to such publishing, i.e. providing. Data providers are notified of the protection of data. The measures and techniques for protecting individual data collected and processed for statistical purposes are established in a Rulebook on the Measures and Techniques on the Protection of Individual Data Collected for Statistical Purposes (SSO internal document), adopted by the Director of the State Statistical Office. A Commission for Protection of Data has been established within the above state administrative body in order to supervise the protection of data. In order to align the contents of the above law with European regulations, it is planned in the course of 2005 to approach the development of amendments and supplements to the contents of the Law on State Statistics.  The Law on State Statistics is aligned with:   Council Regulation (EC) No 322/97 of 17 February 1997: OJ L 052 22.02.1997;   The Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Processing of Personal Data No. 108 of the Council of Europe of 28.01.1981;   Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24.10.1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data; and    Recommendation of the Council of Europe No. R (97) 18.   The Law on Single Registry of the Population in the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the SRM”, No. 46/90) provides for the introduction, keeping and contents of the single automated registry of the population in the Republic of Macedonia, the competent authority for keeping the registry, the protection of the data from the registry and the processing, publishing and use of the data from the registry.  The Law on Personal Identification Records of the Insured and Beneficiaries of Pension and Disability Insurance Rights (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 16/04) provides for special competencies of the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund and for protection of the data on the insured and beneficiaries of pension and disability insurance rights. The abovementioned Fund determines, with a general act, the technical and organisational measures for securing the data from the aforementioned personal identification records. The protection of the data contained in the records on the insured and beneficiaries of pension and disability insurance rights encompasses undertaking measures and activities for protecting the data from: unauthorised access, unauthorised processing , prevention of destruction, loss, modification, abuse and unauthorised use of the data. The Law on Keeping Labour Records (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 16/04), regulates that the data contained in the records established by this Law can be used for statistical purposes and for other official needs. Legally established data can also be used by individuals to whom the mentioned data relate in order to exercise their rights. The legal possibility has been established to exchange data among institutions and state bodies for the purpose of performing the legally established competencies of these entities. The Rulebook on Processing, Using and Protecting the Data in the Information System of the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 35/03) closely regulates the method of processing, using and protecting the data in the information system of the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia.          The Law on Social Care (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 50/97, 16/00, 17/03 and 65/04) provides an obligation for the social security institution and the employees to keep professional and official secrets. The Law protects the data and the facts found out during the conduct of the procedure and during the decision-making concerning the rights of beneficiaries of social security, of legal family protection, and on the competencies established by criminal regulations. The above obligation also relates to all the facts and data that may harm the reputation, dignity and interest of the citizen and their family.  The Law on Family (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 80/92, 09/96, 38/04 and 83/04 – consolidated text) establishes that the data on adoptions are an official secret. The Law on Health Care (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 38/91, 46/93, 55/95, 17/97 – consolidated text and 10/04) specifies that when providing healthcare, healthcare workers are obliged to take care of the beneficiaries subject to healthcare, to respect their dignity, to adhere to medical ethics and to keep the professional secret. The obligation to keep a professional secret refers, in addition to healthcare workers, to other workers in healthcare and other organisations who use medical records or in any way (in performing their tasks) come across data contained therein.  The Law on Keeping Healthcare Records (“Official Gazette of the SRM” Nos. 37/79, 18/88 and “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 15/95), adopted from a former republic regulation by Article 5 of the Constitutional Law on the Implementation of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia specifies that the data entered in the records established with this Law are kept as data of permanent value. In accordance with the Law on the Protection of the Population from Contagious Diseases (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 66/04), reporting AIDS and the HIV infection, as well as microbiological findings for Treponema pallidum, HIV, Neisseria gonorhoeae, congenital infections with the Rubella virus, Tohoplasma gondii and Chlamydia gondii is anonymous.         A Law on the Protection of Mental Health is under development in the Republic of Macedonia, and its provisions will be aligned with the provisions of the Law on the Personal Data Protection. According to the existing Law on Telecommunications (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 33/96, 17/98, 22/98 – consolidated text, 28/00, 04/02, 37/04), the holders, operators of telecommunication networks and means, as well as the providers of public telecommunication services are obliged to provide inviolability of message confidentiality within their technical abilities. The protection of the confidentiality of messages does not apply for messages for which a deviation from this obligation is provided with international agreements concluded, i.e. acceded by the Republic of Macedonia, and with the regulations of the Republic of Macedonia. The Law on Electronic Communications, which is being developed (soon it will be in parliamentary procedure), regulates the issue of ensuring data protection in the way and procedure established by Directive 2002/58/EC related to processing of personal data and protection of privacy in the field of electronic communications. The Draft Law contains a separate chapter on the protection of the secrecy and confidentiality of communications. This chapter will contain, inter alia, provisions regulating protective measures for providing networks and services, communication confidentiality, caller or connecting line identification, location information that are not traffic information, automatic call diverting etc.    The Law on the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”,  Nos. 03/02, 51/03, 85/03 and 40/04) provides for the obligation of the members of the Council of the National Bank and the employees of the National Bank to keep official and business secrets. This obligation binds these persons for five years following the end of their membership in the Council of the National Bank, i.e. the termination of their employment with the National Bank. The data that are an official and business secret may be provided only upon written request of the court. As an exception, in cases laid down by law, the National Bank delivers data to the Ministry of Finance, the Deposit Insurance Fund and the Directorate for Money Laundering Prevention, and such data present an official secret for these entities. The Banking Law (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 63/00, 103/00, 70/01, 37/02, 51/03, 85/03, 83/04) establishes the persons who may not reveal data and information established as a business secret of the bank by law, statute and other bank acts. The obligation to keep a business secret that persists after the termination of employment with the bank also relates to persons with special rights and responsibilities, bank employees and other persons with access to bank operations. The data that are a business secret of the bank, and that the bank is obliged to deliver to the National Bank and to other bodies and institutions in accordance with law, are an official secret. The data on savings deposits and on bank deposits of natural and legal entities, as well as data on the operations of natural and legal persons through accounts, are a business secret of the bank. The above data may be provided only in the following cases:   If the client provides written consent to reveal the data;   Upon written request or order of the competent court;   Upon written request of the national bank for the purpose of supervision, or another body authorised by law; and   If the data are provided to the Directorate for Money Laundering Prevention, in accordance with law.  In accordance with the Law on Securities (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 63/00, 103/00, 34/01, 04/02, 37/02, 31/03, 85/03 and 96/04), the Central Securities Depositary is established in order to determine and settle obligations on the basis of securities transactions and to keep a Registry of securities in the Republic of Macedonia.     The Central Securities Depositary, as a central database, contains electronic data on the issued securities, registering the rights arising from securities, all holders of those rights and the rights arising from securities that can be enjoyed by third persons. The right to obtain data about ownership is enjoyed by the owner of non-financial securities, the issuer of securities and legally authorised bodies and institutions if they need such data in a procedure they conduct within their authorisations or for the needs of their regular operation in accordance with law. The management and the employees of the Central Securities Depositary, as well as certified auditors, are obliged to keep the confidentiality of the data that they have known in carrying out their everyday work, unless they are obliged to provide such information in accordance with the quoted law or another law. The Rules of Order of the Central Securities Depositary establish an obligation for keeping the confidentiality of data up to five years following termination of the employment of the management and the employees in the Central Securities Depositary. The Law on Securities contains special provisions regulating operations with long-term securities with regard to confidential data delivered to the Securities and Exchange Commission and defining the notion of internal information, and it also lists the persons subject to the obligation to keep internal information and their obligations for keeping such information.  In accordance with the Law on Supervision of Insurance (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 27/02 and 98/02), insurance companies are obliged to treat as confidential all the data about the insured and/or other insurance beneficiaries that they have acquired in the course of performing insurance operations. The members of the bodies of insurance companies, their shareholders, employees and other persons, who in the course of their work have access to confidential data, may not transfer them to third parties or allow third parties to use them. The obligation to keep confidential data does not apply in the following cases:   If the data are necessary to establish facts in criminal procedures or other court procedure and if the competent court has filed a written request to provide data;   In cases provided for by the law on prevention of laundering money and other proceeds from crime (“Official Gazette of The Republic of Macedonia”, no. 46/04);   If the data are necessary to establish the legal relations between an insurance company and a policy holder and/or another insurance beneficiary in performing legal procedures;   If the data are necessary to perform coercive procedures on the real property of a policy holder or another insurance beneficiary and if the competent court has filed a written request to provide data;   If the data are collected by the Ministry of Finance or another competent supervision body for the purpose of conducting supervision within the established responsibilities;   If the data are requested by a tax authority with regard to conducting procedures within its competence;   In cases provided by a law regulating mandatory insurance; In accordance with the above Law, the Ministry of Finance or another competent supervision authority, tax authorities and courts, use policy holders database, incurred damage database and the database for appraising insurance coverage and degree of damage, for the provided purposes only. Insurance companies and the State Insurance Bureau are obliged to collect, process, use and deliver personal data necessary for concluding insurance contracts, in accordance with the Law on Personal Data Protection and the special regulations with regard to the insurance database. Insurance companies and the State Insurance Bureau are entitled to establish and maintain the following databases:   Policy holders database;   Incurred damage database;   A database for appraising insurance coverage and the degree of damage; The following personal data are collected for policy holders databases:   The name and surname, date and place of birth, permanent or temporary home address of the policy holder;   The company name of the insurance company, policy number, insurance duration, insured event and insurance coverage; The following personal data are collected for incurred damage database:   The name and surname, date and place of birth, permanent or temporary home address and nationality of the persons involved in the damage incurred, as well as witness data;   The crimes and misdemeanours related to the damage incurred;   The type of harmful event;   The place, time and course of occurrence of the damage;   Description of the damage from the harmful event; The following personal data are collected for the database for appraisal of insurance coverage and extent of damage:   The name and surname, date and place of birth, permanent or temporary home address of the policy holder that insurance coverage concerns, as well as the same data about the indemnity claimant;   The temporary injuries and health condition, type of physical injury, duration of treatment and consequences for both the policy holder and the damage compensation applicant;   The income generated by the policy holder and the indemnity claimant;   Retirement (old-age or disability), re-qualification and extent of the disability of the policy holder and the indemnity claimant;   The costs for medical treatment, medical preparations and orthopaedic aids for the policy holder and the indemnity claimant; The data in the policy holders database are kept for ten years after the expiry of the insurance contract or, in the event of damage, ten years after closing the case. The data in the database for incurred damage and appraisal of insurance coverage and extent of damage will be kept for ten years after closing the case of incurred damage. In accordance with the Law on Financial Police (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 55/02), the financial police officer is obliged to keep a state, official and business secret they have encountered in the course of performing the work within their competence. Misdemeanour sanction is provided for a person who does not keep a state, official or business secret they encountered in the course of performing their competencies.  
2. What is done in order to ensure efficient data protection in the field of police cooperation? 
So far the data protection in the area of police cooperation, has been conducted pursuant to the Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.12/94 and 4/02) and the special regulation determining the mode for using the special data collections .   The recently adopted new Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05) precisely enumerates the circumstances that Directorate for Protection of Personal Data assesses before performing the transfer of personal data to a third country. Unless the state where the data from a personal data collection are to be transferred provides an adequate degree of protection of personal data, the Directorate will not permit the transfer of personal data. This Law specifies also the cases where by exception transfer of personal data to a third country is performed, in a case where the third country to which the data should be transferred does not provide for a sufficient degree of protection. On the basis of the Law on Classified Information (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 09/04) the Government of the Republic of Macedonia has adopted the following by-laws items: Decree on Physical Safety of the Classified Information; Decree on Administrative Safety and Classified Information; Decree on Safety of Persons Users of Classified Information and Decision for Establishment of the Number of Registers and Control Points in the Ministries, other bodies of civil service and other state bodies (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 82/04). From a technical viewpoint, in the Sector for International Police Cooperation, the telecommunication network is protected by a hardware firewall (VPN) which uses a state-of-the-art algorithm for data protection. Such devices are placed at the exit of the network to the Internet, as well as on the connection with the network of the Ministry of the Interior. Besides this, anti-virus software is used, and is regularly updated, in order to protect the system from the new viruses or varieties.  3. Does an independent data protection supervisory authority exist? 
Pursuant to the Directive on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of such Data 95/46/ of 1995, the Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05) foresees establishment of a Directorate for Protection of Personal Data.  The Law contains a special chapter “Establishment and Tasks of the Directorate for Protection of Personal Data”. The proposed legal provisions envisage establishment of the Directorate as an independent and autonomous state body with a capacity of a legal entity performing supervision over the legality of the activities undertaken in the course of processing the personal data and their protection. The Directorate is managed by a director who is appointed and dismissed by the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia, upon a nomination by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The Director is appointed for a term of office of five years, with the right to be re-elected, but not more than twice. For their work and for operation of the Directorate, the director and the deputy-director of the Directorate are accountable to the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia.  For the position of a director a person who fulfils the following criteria can be elected: he must be a national of the Republic of Macedonia, a distinguished law professional and not to be pronounced a security measure of prohibition to perform a profession, activity or a duty. The terms of office of the director can be terminated by their dismissal or in case of a death. The director may be dismissed upon his own request, or if he is sentenced for a criminal offence to unconditional prison sentence of at least six months; or because of unprofessional, biased and negligent performance of the office.  The Director post is incompatible with performance of other public duties or professions. The director is independent and autonomous in the execution of the office. The director submits to the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia an annual report on the operation of the Directorate as needed and upon a request by the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia, submits also additional reports. The Annual Report on the Operation of the Directorate is published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia. The Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05) also stipulates the obligation of the director and the employees of the Directorate to keep as an official secret the data that they have encountered in their work, both during the terms of office or employment within the Directorate, and afterwards.  The Directorate has the following competences: it assesses the legality of the processing of personal data; publishes the principles of processing of personal data and ensures that the Data Controllers respect them; investigates and has access to the collections of personal data established by the Data Controller, according to type of subjects and aims; controls the operations for processing of personal data which the Data Controllers use; collects data necessary for proper performance of its tasks; maintains a central register of collections of personal data; maintains records on performed transfer of personal data to other countries; receives reports or complaints related to processing of personal data by the Data Controller; issues a prohibition of further processing of personal data to the Data Controller; provides opinion on the secondary legislation of the Data Controllers and performs other tasks established by law. Besides the aforementioned competences, and on the basis of an information notice submitted by the Data Controller before they commence performance of personal data processing operations, the Directorate provides an opinion whether certain operations of processing of personal data pose a special risk to the freedoms and rights of the subject of personal data. In a case of suspicion on existence of a special risk to the freedoms and rights of the subject of personal data, the Data Controller has the duty to ask for the opinion of the Directorate.  For regular and efficient performance of the activities within the scope of competence of the Directorate, the director and the employees in the Directorate are authorised: to enter any premises where a registered system of a collection of personal data is processed, upon a presentation of the individual authorisation and a document for professional identification and to examine the collections of personal data; to ask for written or oral explanation and to summon and interrogate persons in relation to the collection of personal data which is examined; to ask to be presented with documents and any other data related to the subject of control, to examine the equipment used in the processing of personal data and the equipment where the collections of personal data are maintained and to order an expert analysis and opinion in relation to the operation of the Data Controller to be prepared.  If the control finds violation of the provisions of this Law in the course of processing of personal data, the Data Controller is given the task, within 30 days from the date when the violations were detected, to bring their work in line with the provisions of this law and especially to remove the reasons which led to it, to complete, update, correct, disclose or maintain the confidentiality of the personal data; to adopt additional measures for protection of the collections of personal data; to interrupt the transfer of personal data to other states; to secure the data or their transfer to other entities and to erase the personal data. Against a decision of the director, an administrative dispute can be initiated.  With this, the Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05) fully implements the basic principle of the Directive 95/46/ of the European Parliament and the European Council, with regards to supervision over the legality of processing of personal data by an independent body. A precondition for implementation of the Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05) is the establishment of the aforementioned independent body within six months from its entry into force.  
