F. ASYLUM 

1. Please provide information on legislation or other rules governing your asylum policy. 
The Asylum policy is regulated by the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/03) and the Rulebook on the Form of the Application for Recognition of the Right to Asylum, the Mode of Fingerprinting and Photographing of Asylum Seekers, the Form and the Procedure for Issuing and Replacement of Documents for Asylum Seekers and For Persons with Recognised Right to Asylum or to Temporary Protection in the Republic of Macedonia and on the  Mode of keeping records (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.48/03). The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) entered into force in August, 2003. Main characteristics of the Law are as follows:   Shared responsibility between the Ministry of the Interior (a procedure for recognition of the right to asylum) and the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy (activities related to accommodation, alimentation, assistance and integration of recognised refugees);  Normal and accelerated procedure;   Principle of manifestly unfounded application;   Principle of safe country of origin;   Principle of safe third country or first country of asylum;   Subsidiary protection;   Three phases of decision-making (The Ministry of the Interior – Section for Asylum, the Second Instance Commission for Administrative Procedure in the Field of Judiciary, Internal Affairs, State Administration, Local Self-government and Religion within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in second instance and the Supreme Court in cases of submitted  lawsuit against the Commission decision); The Rulebook on the Form of the Application for Recognition of the Right to Asylum, the Mode of Fingerprinting and Photographing of Asylum Seekers, the Form and the Procedure for Issuing and Replacement of Documents for Asylum Seekers and For Persons with Recognised Right to Asylum or to Temporary Protection in the Republic of Macedonia and on the Mode of keeping records (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 48/03) entered into force on July 25, 2004. By this by-law the forms used in the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum are regulated, as well as the issues related to the identification documents of the asylum seekers,  the persons with recognised right to asylum under humanitarian protection and the recognised refugees along with the manner of issuing and replacement of such documents. The procedure regarding the travel documents for recognised refugees (according to the Convention), as well as the manner of fingerprinting and photographing asylum seekers and the manner of keeping records are also regulated by this legal act.   2. Describe your asylum procedure at first and second instances: a) normal and accelerated (if any) procedures; b) number of appeals; c) assessment of the average duration of the procedures; d) identification of services involved and number of staff dedicated to asylum procedures; e) methodology for country of origin information. 
The procedure on submitted applications for recognition of the right to asylum is conducted in accordance with the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/03). Subsidiary provisions on the administrative procedure are stipulated by the Law on General Administrative Procedure (“Official Gazette of the FPRY”, Nos. 52/56, 10/65, 18/65 - consolidated text, 4/77, 11/78, 32/78 - consolidated text, 9/86, 16/86, 47/86 -consolidated text and “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 44/02) and Law on Administrative Disputes (“Official Gazette of the SFRY”, Nos. 4/77, 36/77 and “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 44/02) The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/03) foresees three phases of decision making. The Section for Asylum within the Ministry of the Interior conducts the first instance procedure. In the second instance, the Second Instance Commission for Administrative Procedure in the Field of Judiciary, Internal Affairs, State Administration, Local Self-government and Religion within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia decides upon a submitted appeal. Against the decision of the Competent Second Instance Commission, court protection is guaranteed, i.e. the right to appeal to the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia.  The application for recognition of the right to asylum should be submitted to the police at the border crossing point or at the nearest police station. These police officers are obliged to escort the asylum seeker to the Section for Asylum within the Ministry of Interior, which is the sole competent body for delivering decisions upon such request. The request shall be written or orally presented, which should be noted in minutes. The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/03) provides possibilities for conducting a regular or an accelerated procedure, depending if the asylum application is manifestly founded. The Section for Asylum conducts the first instance procedure in both cases.  
) Normal and accelerated procedures  While conducting the normal (regular) procedure, the Section for Asylum is obliged to take a decision within two months from the day the application is submitted. The authorised official from the Section for Asylum shall make the decision on the basis of the facts and evidence determined during the procedure and stated in the submitted application, information on the country of origin of the asylum seeker or the information gained during the interview.  Upon submission of the application, an identification document valid until the delivery of the final decision in the asylum procedure shall be issued to the asylum seeker. The asylum seeker have rights and obligations stipulated in Article 48 and 49 from the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/03).  These rights and obligations are:  Rights of asylum seekers (Article 48); The asylum seekers until the taking of a final decision in the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum have the right to:  Residence;   Accommodation and care in a reception centre or other place of accommodation assigned by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy;   Basic health services;   Work only within the reception centre or the other place of accommodation assigned by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy; and   Communication with the High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as with non governmental humanitarian organisations for the purpose of providing legal assistance in the course of the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum. The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy takes care for the provision of means of subsistence and healthcare for the asylum seekers, while they find themselves in the Reception Centre or other place of accommodation assigned by this Ministry. 
Duties of Asylum seekers (Article 49) The asylum seeker is obliged to:   Reside in the Reception Centre or other place of accommodation assigned by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy;   Co-operate with the asylum bodies, in particular to give his personal data, to hand over the identity and other documents which he may possess, to allow his photographing and fingerprinting, as well as the search of his luggage and the vehicle by which he has arrived in the Republic of Macedonia, as well as to give data about his property and income;   Subject himself to medical examinations, treatment and omitted immunisation upon request of the bodies competent for the activities in the field of the healthcare, in case of  a threat for the public health; and   To respect the house rules of the Reception Centre or other place of accommodation assigned by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The Section for Asylum at the Ministry of the Interior shall provide an interpreter and legal assistance for the asylum seeker in the course of the procedure.  The asylum seeker has the right to appeal against the decision rejecting the asylum application within 15 days from the receipt of the First Instance Decision which is pronounced by the Section for Asylum. The appeal shall be submitted to the Second Instance Commission for Administrative Procedure in the Field of Judiciary, Internal Affairs, State Administration, Local Self-government and Religion within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The appeal postpones the execution of the decision. The afoementioned Second Instance Commission is obliged to decide upon the appeal within two months from the day the appeal was submitted.  Against the decision of the Second Instance Commission, an administrative dispute may be initiated before the Supreme Court, i.e. an appeal may be submitted within 30 days from the day of receipt of the Commissions’ decision.  The accelerated procedure is implemented when the asylum application is manifestly unfounded, unless an unaccompanied minor or mentally disabled person has submitted the application. Pursuant to Article 35 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), the asylum application is considered to be manifestly unfounded if:   In the claim there are no grounds for fear of persecution because the application has not been submitted for reasons identified by the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), but for the possibility of employment and better living conditions, or when the asylum seeker offers no evidence that he/she would be a subject to persecution or when his/her claims are impossible or contradictory;   The application is based on a deliberate deception or an abuse of the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum;     The person has arrived from a safe country of origin, unless he proves that the country of origin is not safe for him/her; and     The person has arrived from a safe third country, where he/she could have applied for asylum, unless he proves that the third country is not safe for him/her; The asylum seeker commits a deliberate act of deception and abuse of the procedure for the recognition of the right to asylum in case when:   Without reasonable explanation, he/she deliberately makes false statements in his/her asylum application, orally or in written form, and these statements are of crucial nature and significance for determining his/her status of recognised refugee;   Without reasonable explanation has based his/her application on a false identity or on forged documents, which he/she asserts to be authentic;    He/she deliberately destroys, damages or conceals a travel document, other document or evidence relevant for the procedure, in order to obstruct the course of the procedure and to deceive the asylum bodies regarding his/her identity;   The asylum application is submitted in order to obstruct the execution of the decision for expulsion from the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, while the asylum seeker, previously had enough possibilities to apply for recognition of the right to asylum,    The asylum seeker’s application has been rejected in another country, following an examination on the substance of the claim, in a procedure comprising adequate procedural safeguards, pursuant to the Convention, provided in Article 2, sub-paragraph 1 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003); and    Has been granted asylum in another country and continues to enjoy protection in that country; The First Instance Body - the Section for Asylum is obliged to deliver a decision within 15 days from the day of submission of the asylum application in an accelerated procedure.  The asylum seeker in this case has the right to appeal to the Second Instance Commission for Administrative Procedure in the Field of Judiciary, Internal Affairs, State Administration, Local Self-government and Religion within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia within three days from the day of delivery of the decision. The Commission delivers a decision within 15 days from the day of submission of the appeal. In the accelerated procedure, an administrative dispute may not be initiated against the decision of the Second Instance Commission of the Government.   b) Number of appeals  The Section for Asylum currently conducts procedures upon 1155 applications for recognition of the right to asylum submitted during 2003, which cover a total of 2311 persons, out of which 1155 are adults. A total of 597 first instance decisions (1229 persons – 597 adults) have been delivered by the end of September 2004, out of which the status of a refugee was recognised in 6 cases (12 persons – 6 adults); in 365 cases (809 persons – 365 adults) the right to asylum on humanitarian grounds (subsidiary protection) was recognised; in 113 cases (209 persons – 113 adults) the applications for recognition of the right to asylum were rejected and in 113 cases (199 persons – 113 adult) the procedure was stopped, due to reasons stipulated in Article 24 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection ( The procedure may be stopped if the asylum seeker, without justified reason, does not appear when summoned by the Section for Asylum – which for this purpose deliveres a conclusion) . Against such decisions of the Section of Asylum, inclusive of September 2004, 152 appeals were submitted, out of which 80 appeals were submitted against decisions rejecting the application for recognition of the right to asylum, 70 appeals were submitted against the decision to recognise the right to asylum on humanitarian grounds and 2 appeals were submitted against the decision to stop the procedure. 43 appeals have been submitted to the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia against the decision of the Second Instance Commission for Administrative Procedure in the Field of Judiciary, Internal Affairs, State Administration, Local Self-government and Religion within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.  
) Assesment of the average duration of the procedures Records of the Section for Asylum show that the regular procedure for recognition of the right to asylum from the day of the submission of the application until the day of the Supreme Court decision lasts on average 15 months.  d) Identification of services involved and number of staff dedicated to asylum procedures The Section for Asylum conducts the procedure for the recognition of the right to asylum in the first instance. However, in the initial phase of the procedure, especially regarding the identification of the persons who need international protection, other services are involved, and particularly the Border Police, regular police stations and other bodies within the Ministry of the Interior. Upon the identification of the alien who has a need of international protection, all of the aforementioned services are obliged to escort him/her immediately to the Section for Asylum as a sole responsible and qualified service for conducting the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum. The Section for Asylum consists of one Head of Section and three inspectors in charge of conducting procedures on submitted applicationc for recognition of the right to asylum.  
) Methodology for country of origin information. In accordance with the current practice, each of the employees while conducting a concrete procedure upon a submitted application for recognition of the right to asylum, prior to scheduling the interview, prepares and collects data relating to the country of origin or country of residence of the asylum seeker. Thereby, mostly used are the reports prepared by the international organisations (UNHCR, IOM, OSCE) and the ones prepared by the non-governmental organisations. Information are also collected from other sources via Internet.    3. Do you apply the following concepts (if yes, how?): a) safe third country; b) safe country of origin; c) manifestly unfounded claims. 
The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) stipulates the concepts of: a) Safe third country   b) Safe country of origin and  c) Manifestly unfounded application. 
) Safe third country As a Safe third country or First country of asylum, pursuant to Article 10 of the abovementioned Law, shall be considered the state in which the asylum seeker  retained prior to his arrival in the Republic of Macedonia, and  whereto it may be presumed he can return safe from persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of particular social group or his political opinion, or from torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. As Safe third country shall be considered the state:   Where there is no serious risk of persecution due to the aforementioned reasons or from torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;   Which respects and implements the principle of non-refoulment; and   Which will receive the asylum-seeker, provide him access to a procedure for recognition of the right to asylum which provides the basic procedural safeguards and will examine the application for recognition of the right to asylum in substance; 
b) Safe country of origin As a Safe Country of Origin pursuant to Article 9 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) shall be considered the state where its citizens or stateless persons, having there their last habitual residence are safe from persecution for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group, political opinion, or they are safe from torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. This shall be determined particularly based upon the respect of human rights defined by the international  instruments, existence of democratic institutions (democratic processes, elections, political pluralism, freedom of thought and public expression of the thought, availability and effectivness of the legal protection) and the stability of the country. The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) for the implementation of these concepts does not foresee creation of safe countries’ list. Thus, these concepts shall not be applied by automatism, rather it will depend on the information on the countries of origin at the day of submission of application for recognition of the right to asylum and the conduct of procedure, and on the fulfilment of the conditions prescribed by this Law, that are aforementioned. In cases when Section for Asylum will refer on these concepts, the asylum seeker, during the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum, may prove that the country of origin or the first country of asylum is not safe for him. c) Manifestly unfounded applications The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 49/2003) stipulates the concepts of Manifestly unfounded applications in the part that regulates the accelerated procedure (Article 34, 35, 36 and 37). In doing so, the previous two concepts are stipulated as part of the reasons which make the application for recognition of the right to asylum manifestly unfounded and provides basis for conducting of the accelerated procedure. For more details see answer 24_F_02
4. Describe the procedural guarantees for asylum applicants: a) information, interview, right to counsel and representation, interpretation/translation; b) independence of review and appeal procedures; c) measures for unaccompanied minors. 
The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) prescribes several procedural guarantees in the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum from the moment of declaring the need of international protection until the moment of completion of the procedure. The Principle of Non-Refoulement - Article 7, legal  assistance - Article 14, non-sanctioning of the illegal entry in the Republic of Macedonia - Article 17, right to an interpreter - Article 21, right of personal and direct presentation the request (right to a hearing) - Article 28, right to an appeal and right to a judicial protection  - Article 39 are stipulated by this law.  
) Information, interview, right of councelling and representation, inerpretation/ translation Information  According to the established procedure upon individually submitted request for recognition of the right to asylum, and pursuant to Article 14 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), the asylum seeker, immediately after declaring the request to the Section for Asylum, receives verbal legal assistance and explanations regarding his/her rights and obligations in the procedure that will take place, in his mother language or in the language he/she understands, within the boundaries of possibilities. The Section for Asylum notifies the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refuges in Skopje for the presence of an asylum seeker, which, pursuant to the above stated article has the right of access and communication with the asylum seekers in all stages of the procedure. Interview The provisions of Article 28 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) prescribe that the asylum seeker have the right to be interviewed by an authorised official from the Section for Asylum in order to present orally and immediately all facts and reasons that place him in need for international protection. Upon a request of the asylum seeker, the interview shall be carried out by a official of a same gender coming from the Section for Asylum. During the interview, minutes shall be kept and the persons who participated in the hearing shall sign the minutes.  Right on counseling and representation Pursuant to Article 14 of the Law on on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), the Asylum seeker has the right to legal assistance and explanation regarding the conditions and procedure for recognition of the right to asylum. The asylum seekers in all stages of the procedure may communicate with persons who provide legal assistance, with the representatives of the High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as with non-governmental humanitarian organisations. The representatives of the High Commissioner for Refugees have the right of access and communication with the asylum seeker in all stages of the procedure, wherever they are staying. Interpretation/translation According to Article 21 of the Law on Asylum, when the asylum seeker does not understand the language of the procedure, the Section for Asylum shall provide an interpreter for that person in the language of his country of origin or in the lanuage he understands. The Ministry of the Interior shall cover the costs for the interpreter. The asylum seekers are entitled to an interpreter of a same gender. The interpreter is bound to keep as confidential the data learned during the procedure. b) Independence through the evaluation of the asylum request and the appeal procedures.  The right to appeal and the right to judicial protection are foreseen in the  Article 32 of the  Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003). The asylum seeker may appeal against the decision of the Asylum Section in front of the competent Second Instance Commission at the Government within 15 days from the day of delivery of the decision. The appeal shall suspend the execution of the decision. The Commission shall decide within two months from the day of submission of the appeal. This Commission is composed of President and members. In accordance with the Law on Government of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM”, No. 59/2000, 12/2003), the Ministers and the public servants who participated in the decision-making in first instance, can not be appointed as a President and members of the Commissions. The Commission decides on the basis of documents - writs (presented evidence) obtained by the body deciding in first instance without undertaking direct hearing of the claimant. Against the decision of the Second Instance Commission of the Government, an administrative dispute may be initiated in front of the Supreme Court of the Republic of Macedonia

) Measures intended for unaccompanied minors  According to the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), the unaccompanied minors are treated as vulnerable category and therefore the articles 23 and 34 of the same Law envisage special procedural guarantees for this category of persons.. According to Article 23, to this category of vulnerable persons a guardian shall be assigned in accordance with the Law on Family (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 80/92, 9/96, 38/04). In the practice, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy assigns the guardian upon a request of the Asylum Section.   Article 34 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) foresees procedural guarantee related to the exclusion of the unaccompanied minors by the accelerated procedure. Namely, the accelerated procedure shall not be implemented even though the asylum application is manifestly unfounded, when the application is submitted by an unaccompanied minor.   5. What concept of protection do you apply? a) How do you apply the 5 grounds in article 1A and the exclusion clauses of Article 1F of the 1951 Convention? b) Are non-state agents of persecution included in your understanding of the refugee definition of Article 1A GC? c) Do you have in place subsidiary protection(s)? d) Do you have in place a temporary protection system to deal with mass influx of displaced persons? 
The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 49/2003) envisages a possibility for recognizing status of refugee according to the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol and recognition of the right to asylum on humanitarian grounds according to the 1950 Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and according to the 1984 Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. 
) Application of the 5 grounds in article 1A and the exclusion clauses of Article 1F of the 1951 Convention. Article 2 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection completely takes over the definition on refugee from the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugee (including the Protocol). Recognised refugee, pursuant to the Law, is a person who owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of  a particular social group or his political opinions; is located outside the state of his nationality and is unable, or owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that state; or who is stateless and being outside the state in which he had a habitual place of residence, is unable, or owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it.   According to the definition, in the course of the procedure for recognizing the right to asylum, it will be determined  whether  the basic pre-conditions are being fulfilled, as stated in the definition:   To be outside the state of his nationality or to be outside the state in which he had a habitual place of residence;   To exist well-founded fear;   The well-founded fear to be correlated to the persecution;    The persecution to be based on reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of particular social group or his political opinions and    The state of his nationality or the state in which he had habitual place of residence to be unwilling or unable to avail him protection; In the course of the procedure based upon the statements stated in the application for recognition of the right to asylum and upon the information on the country of origin shall be determined if these elements are fulfilled. These pre-conditions shall be cumulatively fulfilled, as for the asylum application shall be rejected in case if some of  the stated elements is missing.  In the procedure on the submitted application for recognition of the right to asylum, related to the determination of the identity of the applicant, the Section for Asylum, ex officio, in co-operation with others offices within the Ministry of the Interior (National Bureau of INTERPOL, State Security and Counter-Intelligence Directorate) will check whether the  provision for exclusion from Article 6 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 49/2003) are applicable for that person (directly taken over from Article 1F from the Convention), i.e. if the person has:     Committed a crime against peace, humanity or a war crime, according to the international acts in which such crimes are stipulated;   Committed a serious (non-political) crime outside territory of the Republic of Macedonia prior to being admitted in it as refugee;   Has been guilty of acts contrary to the goals and principles of the United Nations Organisation;  In case where it is determined that the person cannot enjoy the right to asylum due to the above stated reasons, ex officio will be determined if there are obstacles for his return, i.e. if there are elements applicable from Article 7 paragraph 3 (The Principle of Non-Refoulment).  b) Inclusion of the non-state agents of persecution in the understanding of the refugee definition of Article 1A GC. In the course of procedure for recognition of the right to asylum, especially the part of determining the existence of persecution, the law enforcement agencies are being determined.  Thereby, there is possibility for recognition of non-state agents of persecution. In that case it shall be determined :    Whether the persecution is limited to a particular geographic part of the state of his origin;   Whether there was possibility for direct safe access to the other part of the state that is considered as safe for the asylum seeker (in case the non—state agents of persecution will control part of the territory of the state which the asylum seeker has left);    Whether the asylum applicant have requested protection from the state authorities competent for his safety;    Whether these authorities have provided him protection or is it possible for them to provide protection;  
c) Subsidiary protection(s). In addition to the recognition of a status of refugee, the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) in Article 2, Paragraph 1, Point 2 also stipulates recognition of the right to asylum for humanitarian protection. The right to asylum for humanitarian protection shall be granted to person who is unable to return to his country where he would be subjected to torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Pursuant to Article 30 of the abovementioned law, the grounds for recognition of the right to subsidiary protection shall be determined ex officio. d) Temporary protection system dealing with mass influx of displaced persons. Chapter VI of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) stipulates the right to temporary protection in case of mass influx of displaced persons coming directly from a state where their life, safety or freedom have been threatened by war, civil war, occupation, internal conflict linked with violence or mass violation of human rights. The Government decides upon the right of the temporary protection, and periodically re-examines the grounds and need for its extension. The temporary protection cannot last longer then two years. The persons under humanitarian protection shall have the right to submit application for the recognition of the right to asylum, at any time. 6. Have you identified the services competent for the application of provisions for determining the State responsible for the examination of an asylum application and for recording and processing the fingerprints of asylum seekers in this connection (with a view to possible future implementation of the Dublin II and Eurodac-regulations)? 
In accordance with the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) the Section for Asylum within the Ministry of the Interior, as a sole central expert office competent for making decisions, shall decide upon filed requests regarding recognition of the right of asylum. This Section, with adequate enlargement and training of the personnel, shall be competent for future implementation of the Dublin II regulations regarding determining the state which will be responsible for reviewing the requests for recognition of the right to asylum.  In the Rulebook on the Form of the Application for Recognition of the Right to Asylum, the Mode of Fingerprinting and Photographing of Asylum Seekers, the Form and the Procedure for Issuing and Replacement of Documents for Asylum Seekers and For Persons with Recognised Right to Asylum or to Temporary Protection in the Republic of Macedonia and on the Mode of keeping records (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.48/03), pursuant to Article 8, upon the request of the Section for Asylum, the asylum seeker shall be fingerprinted and photographed at the Department of Criminal Police.   7. Describe your registration and identification (including IT) systems for asylum applicants. 
The Article 67 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) determines the Section for Asylum, as a sole competent office, in charge of  establishing, processing and using of the Central Data Collection (pursuant to the Law on Personal Data Protection (“Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia”, No. 07/05)) which contains personal data on the asylum seekers, recognised refugees and persons under humanitarian protection, data on their residence and data on the rights they are enjoying in the Republic of Macedonia. The Section for Asylum shall use two registration systems upon submitted application for recognition of the right to asylum: System for registration of asylum seekers and system for registration of recognised refugees and persons under humanitarian protection.  For registration of asylum seekers, the Section for Asylum is using the modified system used by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees - RICS (Registration of Individual Cases). The system provides opportunity for entering data on the submitted Application, on the asylum seeker, on the persons who are escorting the asylum seeker and data on the course of the procedure through all phases until the final decision.  The part on data pertaining to the submitted Application, will automatically number the application, and will contain entries of data relating to the: date of entry into the Republic of Macedonia of the asylum seeker, date of submission of the application of the asylum seeker, the reasons owing to which the person is seeking the right to asylum (race, nationalities, social group and …), current address of the place of residence in the Republic of Macedonia of the asylum seeker, address of the country of origin, residence status prior entering the Republic of Macedonia, data on the eventual relatives in the Republic of Macedonia.  The Form of the Application contains entries of data relating to the: name and surname of the applicant, maiden name, father’s name and name of the mother, place and country of birth, sex, marital status, citisenship, ethnicities and religion, education completed, employment in the country of origin, identity documents which the applicant possesses, languages and space for photograph of the asylum seeker.  The part on data pertaining to the accompanying persons shall contain entries on the children of the applicant with their identification data and family relation (son, daughter) and possibility for imprinting photograph.   The part on data pertaining to the course of the procedure will record all events starting from the day of submission of the asylum application to the day of issuing of the final decision (submission of the Application, interview, the first instance ruling, appeal, decision in the second instance, etc) with the date and place for possible comment.  This is an internal system and only the authorised officials from the Section for Asylum shall have access to the system with the data on the asylum seekers. The system provides possibilities of receiving reports on various basis (sex and age, date of the submission of the asylum application, religion, and similar information)  system on registration of asylum seekers and system on registration of recognised refugees and persons with recognised right of humanitarian protection.  After the final completion of the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum, the data relating to the recognised refugees and concerning the persons with recognised right to asylum of humanitarian protection shall entry in the special system for automatic processing of the data, the Central Database at the Section for Asylum, within the Ministry of the Interior. The system contains identification data for the stated category of aliens. The system enables opportunity for receiving reports related to the number of recognised refugees and persons with recognised right for humanitarian protection who are residing on the territory of the whole state.  8. Describe your system of reception conditions for asylum applicants. 
The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003)  regulates the rights of the asylum seekers.  Pursuant to this Lawthis category of persons shall have the right toResidence and accommodation In accordance with Article 48 of this Law, the asylum seekers have the right for accommodation in a Reception Centre or at other accommodation facilities assigned by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. While designating the place of accommodation, preservation of family compactness shall be taken into consideration. In accordance to the activities for implementation of CARDS 2002 Programme, activities are underway for building a Reception Centre for asylum seekers, which will operate within the framework and authority of the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. Deadline for implementation of this project is October, 2005. The Centre will satisfy all European criteria and standards for accommodation of this category of persons, including conditions for providing care for asylum seekers with special needs, unaccompanied minors, as well as victims of torture and other forms of violence. Until completing this project, the asylum seekers will be provided with accommodation in the shelter centre within the framework of the Ministry of the Interior. The basic condition for providing accommodation in the stated centre will be the need of international protection of the person who submitted application for recognition of the right to asylum. This Centre, in co-operation with the UNHCR Office is Skopje will provide food and primary healthcare. Beside accommodation in the Reception center, there is a practice of providing accommodation for asylum seekers in the families of the nationals of the Republic of Macedonia.  Information  According to the established procedure upon individually submitted request for recognition of the right to asylum, and pursuant to Article 14 of the Law on Asylum and Tepmporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), the asylum seeker, immediately after declaring the request to the Section for Asylum, receives verbal legal assistance and explanations regarding his/her rights and obligations in the procedure that will take place, in his mother language or in the language he/she understands, within the boundaries of possibilities. The Section for Asylum notifies the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refuges in Skopje for the presence of an asylum seeker, which, pursuant to the above stated article has the right of access and communication with the asylum seekers in all stages of the procedure. Interview   The provisions of Article 28 of the Law prescribe that the asylum seeker have the right to be interviewed by an authorised official from the Section for Asylum in order to present orally and immediately all facts and reasons that place him in need for international protection. Upon a request of the asylum seeker, the interview shall be carried out by a official of a same gender coming from the Section for Asylum. During the interview, minutes shall be kept and the persons who participated in the hearing shall sign the minutes.  Right on counseling and representation  Pursuant to Article 14 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), the asylum seeker have the right to legal assistance and explanation regarding the conditions and procedure for recognition of the right to asylum. The asylum seekers in all stages of the procedure may communicate with persons who provide legal assistance, with the representatives of the High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as with non-governmental humanitarian organisations. The representatives of the High Commissioner for Refugee have the right of access and communication with the asylum seeker in all stages of the procedure, wherever they are staying. Interpretation/translation According to Article 21 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), when the asylum seeker does not understand the language of the procedure, the Section for Asylum shall provide an interpreter for that person in the language of his country of origin or in the lanuage he understands. The Ministry of the Interior shall cover the costs for the interpreter. The asylum seekers are entitled to an interpreter of a the same gender. The interpreter is bound to keep as confidential the data learned during the procedure. Identity documents In accordance with Article 39 and 40 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) the identity documents issued to the asylum seekers are valid until the delivering of a final decision in the asylum procedure, i.e. until the expiration of the time period within which the person is obliged to leave the territory of the Republic of Macedonia after the final decision rejecting his application comes into force. The Ministry of the Interior – the Section for Asylum issues the identity documents for asylum seekers.  Residence  According to the provisions from Article 38 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) the asylum seeker have the right to reside and the right to free movements in the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. Health protection Pursuant to Article 48 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), the asylum seekers have the right to basic health services. The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy takes care for the provision of means of subsistence and healthcare for the asylum seekers, while they find themselves in the reception centre or other places of accomodation assigned by this Ministry. Pursuant to Article 49 of the aforementioned Law, the asylum seekers are obliged to subject themselves to medical examinations, treatment and ommited immunisation upon request of the bodies competent for the activities in the field of the healthcare, in case of a threat for the public health.  Education  Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) explicitly does not prescribes the right and obligation for education of the children of the asylum seekers, or juvenile asylum seekers. However, according to the established practice with regards to the asylum seekers from Serbia and Montenegro -Kosovo, the children of this category of asylum seekers are included into the regular state educational system. Employment The asylum seekers have no access to the labour market untill completion of the procedure, i.e. untill taking a decision that recognises their right to asylum in the Republic of Macedonia. Nevertheless, pursuant to Article 48 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), a possibility to work is foreesen only within the Reception Centre or other place of accomodation assigned by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy.  The Republic of Macedonia, to a great extent, implements the European standards and conditions regarding the admission of the asylum seekers. When the new Reception Center within the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy becomes operational this system will be completely in line with the European standards.     9. Describe the framework for cooperation with UNHCR and NGOs. 
The cooperation with the UNHCR and non-governmental organisations is taking place in connection with:    The legal procedure in assessing the grounds of the submitted applications and exchange of statistical data on the number of asylum seekers, persons with a recognised refugee status and persons with right to asylum on humanitarian grounds;   The accommodation and assistance to asylum seekers. The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) establishes a principle of shared competencies. The Ministry of the Interior – the Asylum Section is in charge of the legal procedure for assessment of the grounds of the application for recognition of the right to asylum, while the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy is in charge of the accommodation and assistance to asylum seekers and of the integration of the recognised refugees. In accordance with such division of competencies, the cooperation with the UNHCR, regarding issues under the mandate of this UN Agency, mainly involve these two ministries. The legal framework for cooperation is regulated by the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003):   Article 13 - according this article the Asylum Section shall cooperate with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees at all stages of the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum;   Article 14 - grants the right to the asylum seekers, to communicate with persons providing legal aid, representatives of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as with non-governmental humanitarian organisations, at all stages of the procedure, and   Article 48 – according to which the asylum seekers may contact the UN High Commissioner for Refugees, as well as non-governmental humanitarian organisations to receive legal aid in the procedure for recognition of the right to asylum; The cooperation between the Ministry of the Interior– Section for Asylum and the UNHCR Office in Skopje started after the establishment of the Section for Asulym, in the end of 1998. The UNHCR Office is actively involved in the efforts to build an asylum system compatible with the system of the European Union member-states, being also involved in the legislative and procedural issues and in the exchange of information and statistical data. Representatives of the UNHCR Office in Skopje have been and are involved in all working groups and activities related to asylum issuing. Thus, the UNHCR has participated in:   The activities for drafting the new Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection;   The activities of the Macedonian Country Team for development of the National Action Plan on Asylum and Migration;    The activities for implementation of the CARDS 2002 Programme – by their representative in the Steering Committee; In addition to the aforementioned activities, as of 2000, the Section for Asylum has been financially supported by the UNHCR in respect of staff education and training, as well as regarding the fulfilment of certain legal obligations (free of charge legal aid to asylum seekers, interpreters, etc.). The cooperation between the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy and the UNHCR is based on the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the UNHCR and the Government of the Republic of Macedonia on 08.11.1994. Every year, this Ministry, assisted by UNHCR, implements various sub-projects dealing with accommodation, alimentation, provision of primary healthcare, legal protection and education of persons under humanitarian protection who reside on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. This Ministry had exceptional cooperation with the non-governmental sector in offering basic care to persons under humanitarian protection, especially in the course of the Bosnian and the Kosovo crises. 10. Describe your integration policy for refugees. 
Pursuant to the National Action Plan of the Republic of Macedonia on Asylum and Migration (For more details see 24_Annex_01), the integration policy is related to the rights, obligations and possibilities of the recognised refugees. The policy of integration is primarily directed towards intensifying of the process of inclusion of these persons in the social life, by finding modalities for their adjustment to the new environment. The integration policy is not directed towards recognition of privileges for refugees and immigrants, but towards reduction of the obstacles and providing equal rights and possibilities for these persons. The Republic of Macedonia undertakes steps towards improvement of the system of integration, in order to create appropriate possibilities for further integration of the refugees in society and better conditions for life. 

To fulfil these objectives and to find durable solutions for the problems of refugees, the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) envisages certain rights, which these persons may exercise. Primarily, it must be mentioned that these persons are socially insecure, so pursuant to the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), persons with recognised refugee status in the first two years have the right to financial assistance and accommodation. The right to accommodation, in accordance with the principles of participation of the local community, is provided for by affording adequate housing for temporary use or of financial assistance needed to provide housing, until these persons are capable to earn funds for their subsistence, but not longer than two years from the date when the decision to recognise refugee status has been adopted. Regarding the financial assistance, pursuant to Article 53 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) a person with a recognised refugee status, who has no income or cannot earn income from his property, has the right to financial assistance as monthly allowance, as a part of the basic financial assistance to the holder of this right, and allowance for the other family members who do not have income (assistance co-beneficiaries) until they themselves start earning their subsistence, but not later than two years from the date of receiving the decision for recognition of the status of a refugee. In addition to these rights, persons with recognised refugee status have the right to primary healthcare, until they acquire the capacity of an insured person. The rights and obligations of refugees are regulated in Article 51 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003). Pursuant to Article 51, unless otherwise provided for in this or another law, recognised refugees have the same rights and obligations as the nationals of the Republic of Macedonia, with the following exceptions:   They do not have the right to vote;   They are not subject to conscription for military service;   They may not perform activities, be employed and establish associations of citizens and political parties in a cases in which the law prescribes the condition that the person is a national of the Republic of Macedonia; In light of the above stated, it can be concluded that these persons are equivalent with the nationals in terms of their rights, i.e. they have unimpeded access to social, healthcare, educational and justice institutions of the system. These persons have the right to participate in the labour market under conditions prescribed in the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), in which respect, equal rights are prescribed, in principle. Namely, pursuant to Article 56 of Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) recognised refugees exercise the right to work under the same conditions foreseen by the respective legislation for aliens having permanent residence permit in the Republic of Macedonia, while in terms of the employment rights they are equivalent with the macedonian nationals. The activities directed towards integration of refugees also encompass design of special programmes for study of the Macedonian language, education and vocational training (learning various types of skills/crafts) and other measures. The implementation of this objective requires cooperation with the existing non-governmental organisations, as well as establishment of new NGO’s of such character. At the same time both the non-governmental organisations and the civil society, with their information campaigns for promotion of tolerance towards the refugees and against xenophobia are of special importance in the process of integration of refugees.  11. Describe the system put in place to collect data and statistics on asylum and refugee movements in your country and provide the following data (reference period: 2001-2004): number of asylum seekers, number of refugee and other protection status recognised, 10 main citizenships of origin of asylum seekers, for each year. (In answering this question it is recommended to use the information to be submitted to EUROSTAT for the joint annual questionnaire on migration).  
Pursuant to Article 67 of the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003), the Section for Asylum within the Ministry of the Interior is in charge of keeping information and statistical data on asylum. The Section for Asylum within the Ministry of the Interior has established a Central Data Base. This was in compliance with the previous Law on Personal Data Protection ("Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia" Nos. 12/94 and 4/02), and it is in accordance with the newly adopted law on 25.01.2005 (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.07/05). The Data Base contains personal data on asylum seekers, recognised refugees and persons under humanitarian protection, data on their residence, and the rights they are enjoying in the Republic of Macedonia.  According to data collected by the Section for Asylum within the Ministry of the Interior, the situation regarding asylum seekers and persons with recognised right to asylum in 2002, 2003 and 2004 is the following:  




Decision-making Year Number of asylum seekers Refugee status Humanitarian protection, Suspended procedure Rejected requests In procedure 2002 118 1  / 15 102 / 2003 2311(5)* 12  809(2)  199  209 1082(3) 2004 48 /  / 1 17 30 Source: Ministry of the Interior * The data in brackets pertain to unaccompanied minors During 2002, procedures upon submitted requests for recognition of the right to asylum were implemented pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens ("Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia", Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02). The procedures upon requests for recognition of the right to asylum submitted during 2003 were pursuant to the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) that entered into force on 3.08.2003. Bearing in mind that the Section for Asylum still processes requests for recognition of the right to asylum submitted during 2003, from the requests submitted during 2004, processed as priority were only the manifestly unfounded ones, for which the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/2003) prescribes an accelerated procedure.  In the period between 2002 and 2004, the citizens of the following three states have submitted requests for granting asylum in the Republic of Macedonia:  
States 2002 2003 2004 Serbia and Montenegro  116 2310(5)* 47 Turkey  Bulgaria  Source: Ministry of the Interior  * The data in brackets pertain to unaccompanied minors. 
