E. ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION 
1. Please give a brief overview of your legislation with regard to combating illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings, in particular whether you have signed and ratified the Palermo Treaty on Organised Crime and its two Protocols on smuggling and trafficking in human beings. 
The current legislation concerning the trafficking in human beings and illegal immigration contains numerous measures which are a solid base for efiicient combating and reduction of these types of criminal activities.   The Criminal Code of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”,  Nos. 37/96, 80/99, 4/02, 43/03 and 19/04) regulates the trafficking in human beings and illegal migration in the following articles: Article 418 Founding a slavish relationship and transportation of persons in slavery, Article 191 Mediation in prostitution and Article 402 Illegal crossing of the state border.  Article 418 Founding a slavish relationship and transportation of persons in slavery anticipates sanctions against a person who by violating the rules of international law places another person in slavery or in some similar relationship, or keeps him/her under such relationship, buys, sells, hands over to another, or mediates in buying, selling or handing over of such person, or instigates another to sell his/her freedom or freedom of a person he/she is keeping or caring for. The transport of persons under slavish or similar relationship from one country to another is also sanctioned and deemed as aggravated criminal offence if it is committed against a juvenile.    Article 191 Mediation in prostitution prescribes sanctions against a person who recruits, instigates, stimulates or persuades another person to prostitution, or a person who in any kind of way participates in handing over another to someone for performing prostitution, as well as a person who because of profit enables another person to use sexual services. It is a more aggravated criminal offence if the person who because of profit, by using force or by serious threat to use force, forces or by deceit induces another to provide sexual services, as well as when the crime is committed with a juvenile or a child.  Higher punishment is anticipated for the person who organises the crime, namely the offender shall be punished from one to ten years of imprisonment.  The illegal migration, according to this law, was regulated by Article 402 Illegal crossing of the state border where penalties are anticipated towards persons conducting illegal transfer of other persons across the border of the Republic of Macedonia, or towards persons who on the basis of self-interest enable another person to cross the border illegally.   According to the commitment to combat trafficking in human beings, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia on 12 December 2000 signed the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Human beings, especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime. After signing the mentioned UN Convention and its Protocol and other Conventions in the field of protection of human rights that are in the direction of prevention and extirpation of trafficking in human beings, the Assembly of Republic of Macedonia on 25.01.2002 adopted the Law Amending the Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 04/02), where Article 418-a defines the criminal offence of Trafficking in human beings.  The criminal offence Trafficking in human beings is in line with the UN Convention definition on trafficking in human beings and is defined as a perpetration aiming to assist and protect the victims of trafficking in human beings from exploitation through prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or servitude, slavery or similar relationship to slavery or inadmissible transplantation of human body parts. The act of committing this criminal offence is comprised of recruiting, transporting, transferring, buying and selling persons, harbouring or receiving persons because of exploitation by prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or servitude, slavery or similar relationship to slavery and unlawful transplantation of human body parts. The way of execution of this criminal offence is through usage of force, serious threat or other forms of coercion, by kidnapping, by deceit and abuse of own position or of weakness of somebody else, or by giving money and other benefits in order to obtain agreement of the person that has control over another person. Trafficking in children and minors presents an aggravated form of this crime, for which a stricter sentence is prescribed.        The Article also prescribes sanctions for persons who organise committing this crime, as well as for those who seise or destroy a personal identification card, passport or other person’s identification document, and for a person who uses or enables another person to use sexual services from persons for which he knows they are victims of human trafficking. Beside the above mentioned Article, the trafficking in human beings is partly regulated by Article 191 Mediation in prostitution and by Article 402 Illegal crossing of the state border.     The amendments of 2004 (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 19/04), have amended the Article (418-)  Trafficking in Human beings by widening the definition of recruiting, transporting, transferring, buying and selling persons, harbouring or receiving persons because of exploitation by prostitution or other forms of sexual exploitation, pornography, forced labour or servitude, slavery or similar relationship to slavery, forced marriages, forced fertilisation, illegal adoption or relations similar to illegal adoption or inadmissible transplantation of human body parts. In addition, the amended article prescribes: higher penalties for perpetrators of this criminal act, accountability of a legal entity and seizure of goods used for execution of this offence. The same Law Amending the Criminal Code introduced two new articles in the field of human trafficking and illegal migration: Smuggling of immigrants (418-b) and Organising a group and conspiring to perpetrate the crimes of trafficking in human beings and smuggling of migrants (418-c). Article (418-b) Smuggling of immigrants prescribes sanctions against persons who by force, serious threat that will attack the life or the body, or by kidnapping, by deceit or by receiving benefits, by abuse of the official position or by abuse of its own position and position of weakness of somebody else, illegally transfers immigrants across the state border or who owns fake travelling documents with such an aim. The offence is more serious if life or health of the immigrant is threatened, or if the offence is committed against a minor. Seizure of goods and of the transport means used for execution of the offence is prescribed, as well.  Article (418-c) that incriminates Organising a group and conspiring to perpretate the crimes of traficking in human beings and smuggling of immigrants discharges from punishment a person who belongs to a group and who denounces the group before committing a criminal act.  On 28.09.2004 the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia ratified the UN Convention Against Transnational Organised Crime and its two Protocols (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 70/04).  Within national legislation, the illegal migration is also regulated by the Law on Crossing the State Border and Movement in the Border zone (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”,  Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 12/93, 15/93, 31/93, 11/94 and 19/04) and in the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”,  Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02). 2. Specify the authorities and agencies involved in combating transit migration, human smuggling and trafficking in human beings. Describe their working methods and national co-ordination structures. The National Commission for Fight Against Trafficking in Human Beings and Illegal Migration was established by the Decision of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in 2001 (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 18/01). The National Commission includes representatives from the Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Justice, Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, Ministry of Health and the Customs Administration within the Ministry of Finance. In January 2004, a Sub-group of the Commission on Combating Child Trafficking was established. The National Programme for Fight Against Trafficking in Human Beings and Illegal Migration in the Republic of Macedonia enacted in 2002 (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 10/02) foresees legislative and preventive activities, assistance and support to the victims of trafficking in human beings, return and reintegration of those victims, international cooperation and coordination in the enforcement of laws, education of personnel, coordination of the activities and information, as well as media campaign for raising public awareness on fight against trafficking in human beings. The Programme also identifies the responsible institutions and bodies for these activities, in accordance with the responsibilities defined by the Law on Organisation and Operation of State Administrative Bodies (“Official Gazette of the RM”, No. 58/00 and 44/02).   According to the National Programme, the largest part of the foreseen activities falls within the authority of the Ministry of the Interior, more specifically – within the organisational units responsible for the fight against trafficking in human beings, smuggling immigrants and illegal migration. For more details see 24_Annex_02In order to improve the fight against different types of organised crime, in January 2005, a Department for Organised Crime with an outspread structure was established. Within its Sector for violent crime, responsible body for the prevention, detection, documenting and processing criminal offences in trafficking in human beings and illegal migration is the specialised Section for Trafficking in Human Beings and Other Violent Crime.  Within their responsibilities, authorised officers collect operative information and afterwards undertake respective legal measures against the perpetrators of these criminal acts. They press criminal charges to the basic public prosecutor with corresponding jurisdiction, who processes the criminal charge, if accepted, further to the courts of jurisdiction.  The Ministry of the Interior is also responsible for establishment and maintenance of respective database of perpetrators of this kind of crimes, as well as for the victims of trafficking in human beings, and data on identified illegal migrants.  The victims of trafficking in human beings are accommodated in the Transit Centre for Aliens opened in March 2001.  In this Centre, the victims receive 24 hour police protection, psychological, medical and legal assistance. Victims receive this kind of assistance also from the non-governmental organisations that are continuously present in the Transit Centre. The accommodation in the Centre is on a voluntary base and is not conditioned upon witnessing in a procedure before a court in the Republic of Macedonia or upon being of any operational use to the law enforcement agencies. The representatives from the Ministry of the Interior, International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and the non-governmental organisations perform the identification of the Victims. Standard operational procedures that regulate relations between the Ministry of the Interior, the International Organisation for Migration and the non-governmental organisations, engaged in the work of the Centre, are agreed upon in regard of processing victims in the Transit Centre. When a victim of trafficking in human beings is a minor, the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy - the Social Work Centre assigns a guardian, whose role is to provide support for the minor in all aspects.  In case of misdemeanours, as set forth in the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02) and in the Law on Crossing the State Border and Movement in the Border Zone (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”,  Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 12/93, 15/93, 31/93, 11/94 and 19/04), the operational officers from the Sector for Aliens and Immigration Issues and the Border Police Department - Section for Illegal Migration take appropriate action. According to the National Programme for Fight Against Trafficking in Human Beings and Illegal Migration of the Republic of Macedonia, responsible for legislative measures are: the Ministry of Justice – specifically drafting amendments to the criminal legislation; Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Labour and Social Policy and Ministry of Health - responsible for enforcing the penalty provisions in market, health and labour inspection, and for amendments to legislation concerning special conditions for employment of foreign citizens and conditions for receiving temporary residence permit on the ground of employment.  For more details see 24_Annex_02The following Ministries are in charge of preventive measures:    The Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, more specifically - the Unit for Gender Equality - undertakes activities for identification and alleviation of the economic and social factors that contribute to trafficking in women and children; identification of the degree of domestic violence and its economic and social influence on women and children; presentation of statistic data from this field, etc.    The Ministry of the Interior undertakes operational measures and actions in discovering illegal channels used for transferring persons, places of “temporary” residence and the destinations of persons who are illegally transferred and places of final destination for victims. In providing assistance and support to the victims of trafficking in human beings, the following institutions are included: Ministry of the Interior, Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, Ministry of Health and Ministry of Justice. In the Transit Centre, victims of trafficking in human beings are provided with accommodation, food, social and health care and legal assistance. The Centre operates within the Ministry of the Interior and cooperates with the International Organisation for Migration.  The lead institution in the process of providing the right of return and reintegration of the victims in their domicile countries is the Ministry of the Interior. The Ministry concludes bilateral and multilateral agreements on cooperation for return of the victims, establishes cooperation with the shelter centres and the non-governmental organisations etc.  The following Ministries are in charge of international co-operation and coordination in the implementation of legislation: Ministry of Justice, Ministry of the Interior and Ministry of Foreign Affairs. They are responsible for conclusion of bilateral and multilateral agreements with countries from which and to which persons are trafficked, for promotion of communication and cooperation between the public prosecutor offices and the police in South-Eastern Europe countries and wider; exchanging data on criminal groups and individuals with other countries for efficient prosecution and interception of trafficking channels, cooperation with competent governmental and non-governmental organisations, etc.  The National Commission on Fight Agains Trafficking in Human Beings and Illegal Migration is a coordinative body, and its task is to monitor, analyse the current situation in trafficking in human beings and illegal migration and to coordinate the activities of the responsible institutions in the Republic of Macedonia that actively work on resolving the problems in this area. The Commission also provides for a unified strategic approach. For the purpose of establishing an adequate way of cooperation and constructive approach in the mutual operation of the national authorities, the international organisations and the non-governmental sector in the fight against trafficking in humans beings and illegal migration in Republic of Macedonia, the National Commission on Fight Against Trafficking in Human Beings and Illegal Migration founded a Secretariat of the National Commission. The Secretariat, which operates in support of the National Commission, offers administrative and logistic support to the Commission in the process of implementation of the National Programme For Fight Against Trafficking in Human Beings and Illegal Migration.  The organisation and the way and scope of operation of the Secretariat are defined by the Rules of Procedure adopted at the Eight Session of the National Commission. Hence, the Secretariat is responsible for: realisation of the priority activities of the National Commission, coordination of projects for implementation of the activities of the National Commission with international organisations; preparation of materials and the agenda for Commission sessions; establishment of communication and exchange of experience with other countries for the purpose of improving the fight against trafficking in human beings; participation in the preparation of materials and organising seminars for training personnel of the Ministry of the Interior, judges and public prosecutors, etc.  The Secretariat of the National Commission includes representatives from organisational units within the Ministry of the Interior, international organisations and non-governmental organisations.   3. Please describe the international cooperation in place in this field (regional fora, bilateral agreements, cooperation with EU). The Republic of Macedonia, in accordance with its commitment to prevent illegal migration, actively participates in all regional fora dealing with this issue. The Republic of Macedonia is a regular participant of the Justice and Home Affairs Ministerial Conferences of the SEE countries within the South-East European Cooperation Process, currently chaired by Romania, where European Commission representatives and the Special Coordinator of the Stability Pact  for South-Eastern Europe are also participating. At the same time, the Republic of Macedonia is a member of the SECI Regional Centre for Combating Trans-border Crime seated in Bucharest, which achieves notable success. Similar cooperation is established within the Central European Initiative.  Within the Stability Pact for SEE, the Republic of Macedonia, participating in the different working groups at the Working Table III pursues intense cooperation aimed at reduction of the illegal migration. At the meeting organised by the Stability Pact for SEE which took place in Tirana in December 2002, a decision to establish the Migration, Asylum and Refugees Regional Initiative – MARRI - was taken. Consequently, a Ministerial Conference took place in Herceg-Novi, in April 2004, where a Regional Forum was established and it was agreed that in the year 2004 the Republic of Albania would chair the Regional Forum, followed by other countries on the principle of rotation. Also, at this Conference it was decided that the seat of the Regional Forum of the MARRI Initiative would be in the Republic of Macedonia, whereby the host country would have an obligation to provide the premises needed and cover the operational costs for the Centre. On 18.11.2004 in Skopje, the Regional MARRI (The Migration, Asylum, Refugees Regional Initiative) centre was introduced. The operation of this Centre is directed towards facilitation of training programmes in the area of asylum and migrations at the regional level, contributing to the development of partnership relations, cooperation and information exchange between the countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process and the neighbouring countries. The main focus is to combat illegal migration, to promote access to high quality information from the countries of origin and to establish a visa-free zone in the Region, as well as to support the dialogue on visa liberalisation in the Region and beyond. Within the South East European Co-operation Process (SEECP), the Republic of Macedonia has been a member of the consultative group for fight against organised crime, corruption and trafficking in human beings, since 2004. The cooperation includes circulation of information by the Ministries of the Interior about the situation in these areas, whereby the consultative group performs analysis on the basis of the received information. A delegation of the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Macedonia participated at the 4Ministerial Regional Forum that took place in Sofia 2003 within the Stability Pact Task Force for Trafficking in Human Beings (SPTF). A statement undertaking obligations for protection of witnesses/victims of trafficking in children was signed at this forum. A delegation from the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Macedonia also participated at the Regional Ministerial Forum (Tirana, 2002) where the Statement of Commitments on the Legalisation  of the Status of Trafficked Persons was signed. Regarding the new focus in the prevention of trafficking in human beings, dealing with children as the most vulnerable category, Republic of Macedonia has established a sub-group for fight against trafficking in children, as a special section within the National Committee for Fight against Trafficking in Human Beings and the Illegal Migration. On the sixth meeting of the Working Group of the Stability Pact on Trafficking in Human Beings, held on 23 March 2004 in Belgrade, the representatives of the countries from the South-Eastern Europe, including the representatives of the Republic of Macedonia, presented the draft national plans for protection of the rights of the children – victims of trafficking in the South-Eastern Europe. Within the initiative for regional community police training of the Stability Pact,  the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Macedonia also cooperates with the Association of European Police Colleges (AEPC). This cooperation takes place through participation of representatives of the Ministry of the Interior in seminars and courses organied by this association. Among other seminars, the MOI representatives participated on two seminars on prevention of illegal migration and trafficking in human beings in 2001 in Valbandon, Pula, Republic of Croatia. In 1999 the  Republic of Macedonia signed a Cooperation Agreement with the  International Centre for Migration Policy Development (ICMPD). Such agreements with the Centre were also signed with other countries, such as Albania, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Turkey, Ukraine, etc. The International Centre for Migration Policy Development assists the Working Unit  for Fight Against Trafficking in Human Beings within the Stability Pact. In this regard, the project “Regional Training Manual for Personnel Involved in Trafficking in Human Beings” of the ICMPD, resulted in the implementation of the Manual in the basic courses for recruits of the Police Academy in the Republic of Macedonia. Of great importance is also the training seminar for the Unit for Fight against Trafficking in Human Beings, within the Ministry of the Interior, where the ICMPD is an implementation partner.   The Government of the Republic of Macedonia successfully cooperates with the International Organisation for Migrations (IOM) towards practical implementation of the objectives of the National Programme for Fight Against the Trafficking in Human Beings and Illegal Migration. As a result of the successful cooperation between the Ministry of the Interior and the IOM, a Memorandum of Understanding was signed (2003) whereby the two Contracting Parties have agreed to cooperate in the following areas:   Fight against trafficking in human beings;   Assistance programmes in voluntary repatriation of third country nationals;   Technical assistance and cooperation to resolve issues in the area of migration management; Since 1999, the Republic of Macedonia through representatives of the Ministry of the Interior has actively participated in all conferences and seminars organised by the Budapest Initiative, established in the year 1991. At the Third Ministerial Conference held in Prague in 1997, 55 recommendations on legal harmonisation in the areas of visa policy, readmission agreements, exchange of information on illegal migration, asylum, repatriation and financial and technical assistance and fight against organised crime were agreed. For purposes of successful implementation of the recommendations, several working groups are established, as follows: for repatriation/readmission; visa policy; illegal migration and asylum. For each of these groups a Working Group for South-Eastern Europe was established, within which the cooperation with the Republic of Macedonia is carried out through a liaison officer from the Ministry of the Interior, in charge of cooperation with this Working Group.  Furthermore, In the area of suppression of illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings, the Republic of Macedonia also cooperates with the OSCE. In November 2003 a Letter of Understanding was signed between the Ministry of the Interior and the OSCE on the implementation of training regarding gender awareness and combating trafficking in human beings. The cooperation is continuing with the Special Coordinator on this issue within OSCE, as well.    The Republic of Macedonia has continuous cooperation in this area with many European countries, and as a result of this cooperation the following agreements were concluded:    Agreement of Cooperation between the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Macedonia the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Bulgaria - (Skopje 20.10.1992);   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Slovenia and the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for cooperation in the fight against terrorism, illegal trade and the organised crime - (1995);   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Government of the Republic of Croatia on cooperation in the fight against international illegal trade in drugs and psychotropic substances, the international terrorism and the organised crime - (Zagreb 12. April 1996);   Agreement of Cooperation between the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Macedonia and the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian Federation - (Moscow, 06. December 1998);   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria on cooperation in the fight against terrorism, organised crime, illegal trade in narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors, illegal migration and other criminal offences - (Skopje 26.02.2002);   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Government of the Republic Montenegro for cooperation in the fight against terrorism, organised crime, illegal trade in narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors, illegal migration and other criminal offences - (Skopje 10.06.2003);   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Government of the Republic of Romania for cooperation in the fight against terrorism, organised crime, illegal trade in narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors, illegal migration and other illegal activities - (Bucharest 12.11.2003);   Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Government of the Republic of Albania on cooperation in the fight against terrorism, organised crime, illegal trade in narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursors, illegal migration and other illegal activities - (Skopje 14.06.2004);   Agreement of cooperation in the area of internal security between the Governments of the Republic of Macedonia and the French Republic, exchange of experiences in the fight against the organised crime and illegal trade in drugs and psychotropic substances, trafficking in human beings, money laundering, as well as terrorism.   Agreement on cooperation between the Ministry of  Interior of the Republic of Macedonia and the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Ukraine (20. February1999); In a procedure of signing are agreements with Switzerland, Hungary, Norway and Belgium. Protocols:   Protocol for establishment of directions, mode and order of cooperation in the area of small border control and prevention of illegal migration between the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Macedonia and the Ministry of Public Order of the Republic of Albania - (Skopje 05. June 1992);   Protocol for cooperation in the area of security between the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Turkey and the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Macedonia - (Ankara 19. May1992);   Protocol for cooperation between the Ministry of the Interior  of the Republic of Macedonia and UNMIK 27 – (November 2002);   Protocol for cooperation between the Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Macedonia and the State Committee on Nationalities and Migration of Ukraine, in the area of migrations – (Skopje 28.11.2003); On the basis of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement of the Republic of Macedonia with the European Union (Chapter VII – Justice and Home Affairs, Article 76) the issue of signing a readmission agreement with the EC was raised at the First Meeting of the Stabilisation and Association Council between the European Union and the Republic of Macedonia.  It should also be emphasised that the Republic of Macedonia signed readmission agreements with a number of countries (for more details see 24_E_06 and 27_Annex_ 01). 4. Please provide information on methods of data collection on refused aliens, apprehension of illegal residents on national territory and facilitated aliens. (In answering this question it is recommended to use the information to be submitted to EUROSTAT for the joint annual questionnaire on migration). The basic method of collecting data on refused aliens, apprehension of illegal residents on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, as well as on facilitated aliens are the operative findings. They are acquired by direct fieldwork of the Border Police officers involved in securing of the state border, of the operative inspectors in charge of illegal immigration and aliens, as well as from citizens, media and other institutions. All data on the undertaken measures (official notes, information, offence charges, etc.) related to aliens, are entered in the IT system of the Ministry of the Interior, where these data are recorded and processed. Separate records (operative bulletins) are kept, as well, on measures taken against certain aliens. The records contain data on the country of origin, type of offence, personal data, the reasons and the measures taken against the alien – illegal immigrant, etc. These records are available to the services responsible for dealing with these issues. Collecting data on refused aliens, on apprehension of illegal residents within the territory, as well as data about the facilitated aliens is within the competence of the Ministry of the Interior, according to Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92 and 45/02) and the Law on Crossing the State Border and Movement in the Border Zone (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92 and 45/02, 36/92, 11/94 and 19/04). After the alien – illegal immigrant is apprehended, an interview is conducted at the official premises of the Ministry of the Interior, which could result in pressing misdemeanour charges against the illegal immigrant, or measures can be taken immediately for his/her return to the country of origin, in accordance with the abovementioned laws. Considering that the part of the border with the State Union Serbia and Montenegro (towards Serbia) and with Albania are still under the competence of the Ministry of the Defence, apprehension of persons illegally crossing this part of the state border, detected in the green border area, is still within the authority of the Army of the Republic of Macedonia, which immediately informs the Ministry of the Interior. For more details see 24_A_05The data collecting methods are in conformity with the migration module of the EUROSTAT 2004 Statistical Compendium. At the same time, it has to be stressed that the Law on Asylum (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” Nos. 36/92, 66/92 and 45/02. 49 of 25 July 2003) is harmonised with the Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees of 1951 and Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees of 1967.  5. Provide statistics on the number of illegal migrants apprehended in your country in 2002, 2003 and, if available, 2004. Please indicate which nationalities were most frequently represented, which routes and methods were used, and recent trends. During the year of 2002, a total number of 641 foreign citizens, who illegally entered the country, was registered. In 2003, that number was 781 foreign citizens, while in the course of the 10 months of the year 2004 a total of 1122 foreign citizens, who illegally crossed the Macedonian state border, was registered.   The perpetrators of illegal crossing of the state border are mostly citizens of the following countries:  Year 2002 Year 2003 2004 - 10 months  
Ordinal  No. COUNTRIES Number of persons COUNTRIES Number of persons COUNTRIES Number of persons 1. ALBANIA 332 ALBANIA 553 ALBANIA 999 2. ROMANIA 62 BULGARIA 41 SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO 38 3. MOLDOVA 58 ROMANIA 26 BULGARIA 11 4. BULGARIA 26 SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO 27 UKRAINE 5. SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO 31 MOLDOVA 27 MOLDOVA Source: Ministry of the Interior  According to the manner of illegal crossing of the state border of the Republic of Macedonia, the illigal immigrants can be classified as follows :   Unorganised immigrants – without any kind of logistic, who cross the state border illegally on their own;   Partially organised immigrants – when the foreign citizens get assistance from Macedonian citizens, who for certain financial benefit point out the places where they can illegally cross the state border, as well as the direction of transiting through the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, and   Organised immigrants – when in organised manner, through established nets for illegal transit of immigrants, through associates and transporters they are taken to certain destination in the Republic of Macedonia, where they are illegally employed or they are illegally transferred over the state border, mainly to the Republic of Greece or to the Republic of Albania, from where they continue their travel to the Western European countries.  A distinctive feature of this type of organised transfer is that the whole organisation, from the beginning until the final destination, is organised in the countries of origin of the immigrants, and implemented with the involvement of Macedonian citizens (associates and transporters) for adequate financial benefit. Most of the illegal immigrants are Albanian citizens, of which a larger part is trying to cross illegally the Macedonian-Greek state border for the purpose of illegal employment in the Republic of Greece. A part of these immigrants remain in the Republic of Macedonia, where they are illegally employed or doing other illegal activities.  In the last years, on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, due to its strategic position as a crossroads of corridors composing the so-called “Balkan Route”, a part of the immigration movements have occurred for transiting of a number of immigrants to the countries of the European Union as their final destination.   Several illegal border crossings are identified at the northern border with the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro - towards Serbia, in the area of the city of umanovo, as well as at the part of the border towards Kosovo. On the border with the Republic of Albania illegal border crossings are detected in the area of the cities of Ohrid and Struga. There are illegal border crossings towards the border with the  Republic of Greece in the area of the cities of Gevgelija, Star Dojran, and  Bitola, as well as on the border cross-section between the Republic of Bulgaria, the  Republic of Greece and the Republic of Macedonia through the mountain Belasica. On the border with the Republic of Bulgaria illegal border crossings through the mountain Belasica and near the border crossing Novo Selo have been identified. Unlike the previous period of few years, when the number of illegal border crossings was significant (in the year 1999 - 3736 illegal border crossings, in the year 2000 – 9771 illegal border crossings and in the year 2001 – 9264 illegal border crossings), in the period since 2002, due to the stabilisation of the situation in the region, a trend of significant decrease of illegal border crossings was registered.   6. Specify your return policy, including: a) Number and destination of returns in 2002, 2003 and, if available, 2004; b) Readmission agreements in place and planned, as well as ongoing readmission negotiations. The return of aliens is regulated with the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”,  Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02) According to the Law, aliens are compelled to leave the territory of the Republic of Macedonia before the expiry of the term: for a visa free stay; defined with the visa; and the temporary residence permission (unless prolonged). Exceeding this period represents a violation for which the alien may be fined.   The residence may be cancelled to an alien who stays in the country longer than the time period regulated. The local office of the Ministry of the Interior shall issue a decision for cancellation of the stay and the time period within which the alien is obliged to leave the territory of the country.   An alien who will not leave the territory of the Republic of Macedonia during the set time, as well as an alien who will stay in the Republic of Macedonia longer than the time determined (according to the validity of the visa or three months without visa), or in the term determined in the approval for temporary residence, shall be escorted by an authorised official from the Ministry of the Interior to the state border (border crossing point) where she/he entered the country, or shall be escorted to the state border and handed over to representatives of the foreign country whose citizen he/she is.  In case of a juvenile alien who has entered the Republic of Macedonia without a valid travel document or without knowledge, i.e. approval from his/her legal guardians, i.e. who is without the necessary protection, security and means to sustain, or who has not acted according to the regulations of the Republic of Macedonia, the authorised officials within the Ministry of the Interior shall immediately notify the diplomatic-consular office of the state whose citizen she/he is, while in case of being a citizen of a neighbouring country, she/he shall be returned to his/her country.  The costs that might occur from the coerced deportation of an alien shall be paid by the alien, but if the alien does not have financial means, the costs shall be paid from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia.  A legal person, which will bring in an alien, who is not allowed to enter the country, shall be obligated to take that person outside of the Republic of Macedonia at his/her own expense within the term determined by the Ministry of the Interior.  An alien shall not be coercively deported to a state in which his/her life may be endangered due to race, religious or national origin, political attitudes, or if there is a danger of being exposed to ill-treatment or to inhuman behaviour.  Problems concerning the readmission of aliens are due to the lack of accommodation facilities. The Republic of Macedonia does not yet have a shelter for aliens where aliens who are not able immediately to return to their country may be accommodated. The Ministry of the Interior may hold a person in police custody up to 24 hours, and in case the alien is not a citizen of a neighbouring country, appropriate accommodation must be provided until his/her return.  Programmes for the process of voluntary readmission of aliens have not yet been prepared.  These weaknesses are identified in the National Action Plan of the Republic of Macedonia for Migration and Asylum which was enacted on 09.12.2002. The National Action Plan is emphasising the need of financial assets as an essential issue for resolving these problems. For more details see 24_Annex_01
a)  Number and destination of returns in 2002, 2003 and for nine months in 2004 
  In 2002, 1318 aliens were returned. According to citizenship, the figures are the following:  Republic of Albania 77, Bulgaria 148, Serbia and Montenegro 110, Moldova 98, Romania 82, Republic of Turkey 28, Nigeria 24, Ukraine 20, Bosnia and Herzegovina 9, Federal Republic  of Germany and Sudan 5,  Russian Federation 3, Republic of Croatia, Iraq, Poland and Estonia 2 each, Italy, Interim Administration of Kosovo, according to the UN Security Council Resolution No. 1244, the United States of America and Sierra Leone 1 each.    Citizens of the neighbouring countries i.e. territories such as the Republic of Albania, Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro and Interim Administration of Kosovo, according to the UN Security Council Resolution No. 1244 were returned on the border crossings on that state i.e. territory. Citizens of all other countries were escorted and returned to the neighbouring border crossings where they entered the Republic of Macedonia.    In 2003 1567 aliens were returned. From them according to the citizenship, the figures are the following: Republic of Albania 1065, Bulgaria 182, Serbia and Montenegro 166, Ukraine 35, Moldova  28, Turkey 23, Romania 20, Interim Administration of Kosovo, according to the UN Security Council Resolution No. 1244 -  11, Federal Republic of Germany 9, Republic of Croatia, Austria and the United States of America 3 each, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Czech Republic, France and Greece 2 each, Kingdom of Belgium, Belarus, Italy, People’s Republic of China, Russian Federation, Republic of Slovenia, Kingdom of Sweden, Spain, Egypt, Georgia and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 1 each.   Citizens of the neighbouring countries i.e. territories such as Republic of Albania, Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro, Republic of Greece and Interim Administration of Kosovo, according to the UN Security Council Resolution No. 1244 were returned on the border crossings on that state i.e. territory. Citizens of all other countries were escorted and returned to the neighbouring border crossings where they entered the Republic of Macedonia.   In the first nine months of 2004, 1627 aliens were returned. From them according to the citizenship, the figures are the following:  Republic of Albania 1351, Serbia and Montenegro 140, Bulgaria 66, Republic of Turkey 14, Interim Administration of Kosovo, according to the UN Security Council Resolution No. 1244 - 13, India 6, Federal Republic of Germany, Republic of Croatia and People’s Republic of China 5 each, Romania and Moldova 4 each, Bosnia and Herzegovina 3, Kingdom of Belgium and Ukraine  2 each, Brazil, Belarus, Italy and Czech Republic 1 each, persons without determined citzenship 3.  Citizens of the neighbouring countries i.e. territories such as Republic of Albania, Bulgaria, Serbia and Montenegro, and Interim Administration of Kosovo, according to the UN Security Council Resolution No. 1244 are returned on the border crossings on that state i.e. territory.  Citizens of all other countries shall be escorted and returned to the neighbouring border crossings where they entered the Republic of Macedonia.    b) Readmission agreements in place and planned, as well as ongoing readmission negotiations The Republic of Macedonia has signed bilateral readmission agreements with the following states:    Italian Republic (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” – International Agreements No. 34/97), in force since 23.10.1997;   Swiss Confederation (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” - International Agreement No. 27/98), in force since 22.07.1998;   Republic of Slovenia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” - International Agreements No.21/98), in force since 01.02.1999;   French Republic (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” International Agreements No.13/99), in force since 17.06.1999;   Republic of Bulgaria (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” - International Agreements No. 12/02), Signed on 19.06.2002. Response is awaited from Republic of Bulgaria on ratification of this agreement.   Slovak Republic (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” - International Agreements No. 13/99), in force since 01.11.2002;   Republic of Croatia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” - International Agreements No. 47/02), in force on 01.02.2003;   Romania (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” - International Agreements No. 42/04) Signed on 12.11.2003; Still not in force;   Federal Republic of Germany (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” – International Agreements No.09/04) in force since 01.05.2004;   Hungary (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia” - International Agreements, No. 42/04); Signed on 26.09.2001; Still not in force;    Republic of Albania, signed in Skopje on 17.06.2004. Still not ratified.  The Republic of Macedonia is in procedure of signing readmission agreements with the following countries: Benelux countries, Kingdom of Denmark, Ukraine, Poland, Czech Republic, Slovak Republic, Latvia, Kingdom of Norway and Republic of Turkey.  The Republic of Macedonia has plans to sign readmission agreements with other EU member states, as well as with other states with whom we have mutual interest in regulating the matter.  
