D. MIGRATION 
1. Please provide information on legislation or other rules governing migration in your country. In the Republic of Macedonia, migration is governed by the following regulations:  The migration related issues are regulated by the following acts:    Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02), which regulates: the entry of aliens, visas, residence of aliens, travel and other documents for aliens, sojourn and residence of aliens, records of aliens and offences against aliens;    Rulebook on the Manner of Issuing Travel and Other Documents and Visas to Aliens and the Form of The Documents and Visas (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 75/93), defines in detail the procedure envisaged in the aforementioned Law: issuing travel and other documents to foreigners, issuing visas, residence permits, the contents of the records and the manner of their keeping, the form and contents of all prescribed forms;    Guideline on the Manner of Issuing Travel Documents and Visas to aliens by the Diplomatic and Consular Missions of the Republic of Macedonia Abroad and on the Manner of Keeping Records of Issued Travel Documents and Visas to Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 10/98), which elaborates the detailed procedure and conditions for issuing visas and travel documents, the forms for the visa/travel document application and records on the issued visas/travel documents; In addition to the aforementioned regulations, migration is also regulated by bilateral agreements.  The Republic of Macedonia signed readmission agreements with a number of countries. For more details see 24_E_06 and 27_Annex_ 01In the context of migration, the National Action Plan on Migration and Asylum (NAP) of the Republic of Macedonia is of a special importance.  The National Action Plan on Migration and Asylum of the Republic of Macedonia represents a strategic document adopted on 9 December 2002, prepared by the State Team composed of representatives of the Republic of Macedonia, Sweden (leading country), Denmark, Norway and Bulgaria, and representatives of the Office of the High Commission for Refugees of the UN, the International Organisation for Migration and the International Migration Policy Centre.  The National Action Plan entails a review of the present situation and elaborates what needs to be done in terms of legislation, as well as the plans and projects in the fields of asylum, then migration, readmission policy, border control, information-telecommunication aspects of the migration and asylum fields, integration and citizenship and regional cooperation. For more details see 24_Annex_01.  Some of the projects have already been implemented or the implementation process of these plans is ongoing. The Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/03) and the Law on the Citizenship of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 67/92 and 08/04) have entered into force. Furthermore, the Border Police has been established and has taken over the state border security from the Ministry of Defence at the borders with the neighbouring countries Greece and Bulgaria and a part of the border with the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro. Other planned activities have also been completed.  2. Please describe your procedures for obtaining a residence permit, reasons for refusal, renewal or withdrawal of permits, and appeal procedures. Issuing of residence permits, grounds for refusal, renewal or withdrawal of the permits and the appeal procedures are regulated by the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02) and the Rulebook on the Manner of Issuing Travel and Other Documents and Visas to Aliens and the Form of the Documents and Visas (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 75/93). A foreigner may reside in the Republic of Macedonia without a temporary residence permit for a period of up to three months on grounds of a valid travel document, i.e. until the expiration of the visa validity period unless a bilateral agreement on visa free regime between the two countries determines otherwise.  A foreigner must apply for temporary residence permit is he/she intends to stay longer than three months, i.e. longer than the visa validity period, or if he/she comes to the Republic of Macedonia for purpose of study, specialisation, medical treatment, performing certain professional activities, entering into marriage with a citizen of the Republic of Macedonia, employment, ownership of immovable property on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia or for other justified reasons.  The foreigner submits the application, filling in a special form (the text of the form is in Macedonian, English and French) to the local office of the Ministry of Interior in the place of residence. Evidence in support of the grounds upon which the application is filed is attached to the application form, as well as evidence of secured subsistence means.  The evidence enclosed in support of the grounds for the residence permit application is:    For specialisation, training or internship: a certificate from the legal entity or the body where the foreigner has been admitted for specialisation, training or internship;    For education: a certificate confirming that the foreigner is a High School student or a full-time University student from the relevant school or University;   For performing professional activity: approval or licence for practicing certain professional activities issued by the competent Ministry or authority;    For employment: employment permit from the Employment Agency; and    Other relevant evidence depending on the grounds upon which residence is applied for.  In evidence that the foreigner has secured subsistence means or that his/her subsistence means are provided in another way, the foreigner submits a bank account statement, certificate from the legal person or body confirming the amount of the salary or of the scholarship or other document which evidently proves that the foreigner has sufficient subsistence means.  The temporary residence permit is issued by affixing a stamp on the travel document of the foreigner. The validity of the temporary residence permit is up to one year i.e. until the expiry date of the foreigner’s travel document if this period is shorter than a year.  Temporary residence permits may be renewed for no longer than one year, upon application filed by the foreigner prior to the expiry of the current temporary residence permit. The temporary residence renewal grounds are the same as the grounds upon which the permit has been initially issued or previously renewed.  The foreigner shall be refused a temporary residence permit or renewal of the temporary residence permits if:    There are no grounds to issue the permit (non-existence of the above mentioned grounds);   He/she does not posses subsistence means;    He/she has entered in the Republic of Macedonia in breach of the provisions on entry set forth in the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens;    He/she has been expelled (following a court procedure) or has been withdrawn residence in the Republic of Macedonia for the duration of the measures;    He/she is entered in the records of the competent bodies as an international offender or one in respect of whom there is reasonable suspicion that he/she comes to the Republic of Macedonia with the intention of performing terrorist or other criminal offences;   He/she has provided false personal data or false information about the purpose of the travelling or residence, in the visa application or upon entry into the Republic of Macedonia, or he/she has used forged documents;    He/she does not possess documents based on which his/her identity can be established; and    If he/she comes from an area where there are contagious diseases and does not have evidence of immunisation.  The foreigner has the right to file an appeal to the Second Instance Commission for administrative procedure in the field of Judiciary, Internal Affairs, State Administration, Local Self-government and Religion within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, against the decision refusing temporary residence permit, within 15 days from the receipt of the decision.  Residence may be withdrawn to a foreigner who resides in the Republic of Macedonia on grounds of a temporary residence permit (or on grounds of issued visa or on valid travel document of a country with which a visa free regime is into force) if:    This is required by reasons of protecting the security and defence of the Republic of Macedonia;   If he/she refuses to fulfil decisions of the state authorities;    He/she repeatedly seriously violates the constitutional and legal order, public peace and order, or the security of the state border of the Republic of Macedonia;   He/she violates the provisions set forth in the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens;    In the visa application or upon entry in the territory of the Republic of Macedonia he/she has presented false personal data or false information about the purpose of the stay or is using forged documents;    She/he has been convicted for a crime to an imprisonment of at least three months by a foreign court or a court in the Republic of Macedonia;    He/she no longer has subsistence means, while the subsistence means in the course of the stay in the Republic of Macedonia are not otherwise provided for; and    On grounds of protecting the health of citizens.  In issuing the decision withdrawing residence the following is also taken into consideration: the length of the residence in the Republic of Macedonia, his/her personal, economic and other ties in the Republic of Macedonia and the ensuing consequences of the applied measure for him/her and his/her family.  The residence may be withdrawn for a period not shorter than 6 months or longer than 5 years. During this period the foreigner is not entitled to enter or stay in the Republic of Macedonia.  The decision withdrawing residence shall also contain the term within which the foreigner must leave the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, and in this context the time necessary for the foreigner to leave the country is taken into consideration.  The foreigner has the right to file an appeal to the above-mentioned Second Instance Commission within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia against the decision withdrawing residence, within 15 days from the receipt of the decision.  The appeal against the decision issued to a foreigner who resides in the Republic of Macedonia on grounds of temporary residence permit for a period shorter than three years does not delay the execution of the decision.  The temporary residence permit ceases to apply:    Upon expiry of the validity of the permit, if the foreigner has not filed an application for renewal;    When the foreigner has been expelled (in a court procedure) or has been withdrawn his/her residence; and    In case the alien acquires citizenship of the Republic of Macedonia. 
3. Do you have immigration rules providing for family reunification? If so, please outline these. Article 20, paragraph 1 of the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, 45/02) foresees that a foreigner who enters the Republic of Macedonia with a valid travel document may stay for up to three months i.e. until the expiry of the visa.  A foreigner coming to the Republic of Macedonia for education, specialisation, medical treatment, performance of a professional activity, employment, entering into marriage with a national of the Republic of Macedonia, on grounds of possessing immovable property on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia, or based on other justified reasons for longer residence referred to in Article 20, paragraph 1 of the said Law, can submit an application for temporary residence permit prior to the expiry of the residence permitted on grounds of passport (three months or until the expiry of the visa).  A foreigner who has been continuously residing in the Republic of Macedonia for at least three years (on the basis of temporary residence permit) may be issued permanent residence permit. Foreigners who under the aforementioned provisions have been permitted temporary or permanent residence have also the right to family reunification, as regulated in Article 24 of the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, 45/02): temporary or permanent residence permit may be issued to a child up to 18 years of age or to the spouse of the foreigner who has been granted temporary or permanent residence in the Republic of Macedonia. As an exception, for purposes of family reunification, residence permits may be issued to close relatives (parents) of the foreigner residing in the Republic of Macedonia, if he/she does not have any other relatives that would take due care of him/her in the country of his/her origin.  Article 22 of the mentioned Law foresees that temporary residence permits in general, including cases of family reunification, may be issued for a period of up to 1 year. Temporary residence of the family members of the foreigner may be renewed on the same grounds as in the initial approval, for the duration of the approved residence of the foreigner.  The family members of the foreigner and his/her close relatives submit the application for temporary residence permits, on grounds of family reunification, to the local units of the Ministry of Interior of the Republic of Macedonia in their place of residence.  4. Do you have immigration rules for acquiring a long-term resident status? If so, please outline these. A foreigner acquires long-term resident status upon receiving a permit for permanent residence in the Republic of Macedonia. Permanent residence permits are regulated in the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, 45/02) and in the Rulebook on the Manner of Issuing Travel and Other Documents and Visas to Foreigners and the Form of the Documents and Visas (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 75/93). The foreigner applying for a permanent residence permit submits a special form (the text is in   Macedonian, English and in French). The applications for minors are submitted by one of the parents or the guardian. The documents enclosed with the applications, which are issued by the competent bodies in the Republic of Macedonia, are certified copies, while documents issued by relevant bodies of foreign countries are accompanied with a certified translation. The authorised officer that processes the application may request to inspect the original documents.  The application is submitted to the local office of the Ministry of Interior where the foreigner resides. The authorised officer may ask for additional oral information regarding the facts stated in the application. The application may also be submitted to the Diplomatic and Consular Missions of the Republic of Macedonia abroad.  The following documents should be attached to the application for a permanent residence permit: birth certificate, marriage certificate (if applicable), health status certificate, documents certifying educational/qualification status, document proving that subsistence means are secured or that the subsistence in the Republic of Macedonia has been otherwise provided, and other relevant documents issued by competent bodies.  The basic condition to apply for permanent residence is a continuous legal residence on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia for at least three years. The foreigner must also fulfil the conditions which justify the permanent residence. The conditions, which serve as grounds for permanent residence are: performance of certain professional activities, exercise of employment related rights, entering into marriage with a national of the Republic of Macedonia, real estate possession on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia and other grounds. A foreigner whose residence in the country is of interest for the Republic of Macedonia may be issued permanent residence permit even before the expiry of the three-year minimum period. Permanent residence permit may be issued to a child of up to 18 years of age or to the spouse of the foreigner who holds a permanent residence permit in the Republic of Macedonia.  The permanent residence permit is issued in a form of a decision of the competent organisational unit of the Ministry of Interior. The decision is also imprinted into the travel document of the foreigner.  The foreigner may file an appeal to the the Second Instance Commission for administrative procedure in the field of Judiciary, Internal Affairs, State Administration, Local Self-government and Religion within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia against the decision refusing permanent residence, within 15 days from the receipt of the decision.  The permanent residence permit shall cease to be valid:   When the foreigner moves out or stays continuously abroad longer than a year, and does not accordingly inform the Ministry of Interior (the residence becomes invalid by issuing a decision);   When the foreigner acquires citizenship of the Republic of Macedonia; and    When a security measure of expelling in criminal or misdemeanour procedure has been delivered or when his/her residence in the Republic of Macedonia has been withdrawn by the local unit of the Ministry of Interior in the area where the foreigner resides.  The relevant authorities of the Republic of Macedonia have issued permanent residence permits to a total number of 597 foreigners. Most of them are from Serbia and Montenegro -193, Bulgaria - 85, Poland - 71, the Russian Federation - 50; Romania - 21, Bosnia and Herzegovina - 21; Greece - 17, Uzbekistan - 17, Croatia - 16, the Czech Republic - 16, Slovakia - 15, Australia - 8; the Ukraine - 7, Hungary - 7, Turkey - 6, Germany - 6, Italy - 4, Canada - 3, Iraq - 3, Syria - 3; two or one foreigners are from Jordan, the Netherlands, Slovenia, Japan, Sweden, the UK, France, Belgium, Belarus, and 11 are registered as stateless persons.  5. Describe your system for admission for employment, study and research purposes. Third country nationals may be employed under conditions and in a manner set forth in the Law on the Conditions for Employment of Foreign Nationals (“Official Journal of the SFRY”, Nos. 11/78 and 64/89). Foreigners are employed based on a previously issued working permit, following which temporary residence is granted. Article 12 of the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02) foresees that a foreigner coming to the Republic of Macedonia for purposes of employment, education, scientific research or performance of a certain professional activities is issued a visa. The visa application is submitted to the Diplomatic Consular mission abroad. In the application the foreigner states the reasons for coming to the Republic of Macedonia i.e. which company/organisation he/she would work for, at which educational establishment he/she would attend/study, what type of scientific research he/she would undertake, etc.  Visa is issued following an approval of the Ministry of Interior of the Republic of Macedonia. Upon received request from the Diplomatic and Consular Mission the Ministry of Interior acquires opinion from the Ministry responsible for the area in which the foreigner would be engaged during his/her stay in the country.  After the Diplomatic and Consular mission has received the approval of the Ministry of Interior, the foreigner is issued an entry/exit visa with validity of up to one month. The purpose for which the visa is issued (employment, education, scientific research, etc) is imprinted.  Upon entry in the Republic of Macedonia, the foreigner to whom the Diplomatic and Consular mission has issued a visa on one of the aforementioned grounds is obliged to submit an application for temporary residence permit at a local unit of the Ministry of Interior at the place of residence.  The foreigner who applies for temporary residence permit for purposes of employment, attaches to the application approval for employment (work permit) acquired upon entry in the Republic of Macedonia from the Employment Agency. For more details see answer 02_E_01The foreigner applying for temporary residence permit for purposes of education encloses a certificate that he/she has the status of a pupil/full time student at the relevant school or university in the Republic of Macedonia.  A foreigner applying for temporary residence permit for purposes of research encloses with the application approval for performance of scientific research issued by the competent institution/organisation.  In addition to the evidence in support of the purpose of the stay, the foreigner is also obliged to enclose with the application for temporary residence permit, evidence that he/she has subsistence means i.e. that his/her subsistence has been provided for otherwise (bank account statement of the foreigner, certificate on the salary or scholarship amount, other documents evidencing the subsistence means).  The local unit of the Ministry of Interior issues the temporary residence permit by placing the prescribed stamp on the travel document of the foreigner with validity period of one year or until the expiry of the travel document if less than a year. The temporary residence permit may be renewed upon application by the foreigner filed prior to the expiry of the current temporary residence permit, if the grounds for which the initial permit has been issued pertain and the reasons for the continuation of the residence can be supported by evidence.  6. Describe your integration policy for third country nationals. The formulation of the policy for integration of third country nationals  is based on the following basic principles:   Respect for the international standards in this field;   The need of a balanced and stable economic, demographic and political development of the Republic of Macedonia.  The conditions on the labour market, too, will be taken into consideration, as well as the need to ensure social development.   The policy of integration of third country nationals in the Republic of Macedonia incorporates two components:    Legal regulation of the status of the third country nationals who reside  in the Republic of Macedonia, enabling them to enjoy the rights and duties stipulated in the Constitution, the laws and other regulations;   Undertaking active measures that would facilitate their further integration within the society.  The National Action Plan on Migration and Asylum sets out the framework of the policy of integration. Namely, this document states that the policy of integration aimes at reducing the obstacles and providing equal rights and opportunities for refugees and immigrants. For more details see 24_Annex_01.  These guidelines of the integration policy are implemented through current legislation regulating this area. In accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (Article 29), the aliens enjoy freedoms and rights guaranteed by the Constitution, under conditions regulated by law and international agreements. The Republic of Macedonia guarantees the right of asylum to aliens and stateless persons persecuted for democratic, political beliefs and activities. Extradition of an alien may be carried out only on a basis of a ratified international agreement and on the principle of reciprocity. An alien can not be extradited for political criminal offence, whereby acts of terrorism are not regarded as political criminal offences.  Pursuant to Article 31 of the Constitution of Republic of Macedonia, an alien in the Republic of Macedonia may acquire the right of ownership of property, under conditions determined by law.  Pursuant to Article 2 of the Law on Ownership and other Property Related Rights (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 18/2001), all domestic and foreign natural and legal persons may acquire a right of ownership.  Besides this, pursuant to Article 59 of the Constitution, they are entitled  to freely take out invested capital and profits. Accordingly, pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02) foreign nationals have the right of temporary and permanent residence in a manner and under conditions determined by this law. The provisions of this Law regulate in details the conditions, the methods and the procedure for acquiring temporary or permanent residence, as well as the rights and obligations of the person requesting residence. In accordance with the Law on Associations of Citizens and Foundations (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 31/98), foreign nationals with regulated residence in the Republic of Macedonia have a right to create associations of citizens. This right is developed in details within  Articles 66, 67 and 68 of the Law on Movement and Residence of Aliens (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93 and 45/02). The foreign nationals, according to law, international conventions and concluded agreements with other states, have the same rights as the other citizens of the Republic of Macedonia, or to the extent and level established with bilateral agreements on the principle of reciprocity.  According to the Law on Social Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, Nos. 50/97, 16/00, 17/03 and 65/04) foreign nationals with a right of permanent residence enjoy the same rights in respect of social protection as nationals of the Republic of Macedonia.   These persons may also participate in the labour market under conditions prescribed with  the  Law on Conditions for Establishing Labour Relation with Aliens (“Official Gazette of the SFRY”, Nos. 11/78 and 65/89, as well as the “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No 12/93). This Law regulates the procedure, the modes and the conditions under which the aliens may participate in the labour market and enjoy the rights and obligations from employment in the Republic of Macedonia.  According to the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No. 49/03) the asylum seekers have a right of accommodation and sheltering in a transit centre or some other place determined by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, basic healthcare services and work within the transit centre or other place of accommodation determined by the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy. The persons with recognised refugee status have approximately the same rights as the nationals of the Republic of Macedonia. In accordance with the Law on Asylum and Temporary Protection, these persons are entitled to financial assistance and accommodation in the first two years in line with the principle of local contribution by giving an appropriate dwelling for use, or financial assistance necessary for providing housing facilities until the moment  of securing own subsistence. For the purpose of integration of third country nationals in the Republic of Macedonia, measures undertaken by the state authorities are aimed at supporting their integration in the society through improvement of their legal status in the country and providing of equal opportunities. In this view, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia successfully cooperates with the International Organisation for Migration. For this purpose, a Memorandum of Understanding  (“Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, No.55/01) is signed. The Macedonian authorities are strengthening the cooperation of the various state institutions (establishment of inter-ministerial working body - for more details see answer 24_F_10) with the institutions from the private sector/non-governmental sector, and they are supporting the cooperation with the network of organisations involved in this process.   7. Provide immigration statistics for 2002, 2003 and, if available, 2004, including a citizenship breakdown and reasons for immigration.  The statistics concerning the citizenship and reasons for immigration are as follows: 
REGISTERED IMMIGRANTS WITH SHORT TERM AND LONG TERM RESIDENCE -  BY COUNTRY  Country 2002 2003 Serbia and Montenegro 879 712 Republic of Macedonia 723 567 Albania 297 206 Bulgaria 160 97 Ukraine 129 44 Bosnia and Herzegovina 103 62 Turkey 87 48 Russian Federation 57 30 Croatia 46 33 Greece 46 56 Germany 25 25 United States of America 90 China - 20 Undetermined citizenship 11 59 Other countries 284 190 Total 2.798 2.239 Source: Ministry of the Interior  
REGISTERED IMMIGRANTS WITH SHORT TERM AND LONG TERM RESIDENCE - BY REASONS FOR IMMIGRATION 
2002 2003 1employment 311 192 marriage 303 254 family reasons 1.366 1.071 professional activities 154 192 other reasons 664 530 Total 2.798 2.239 Source: Ministry of the Interior  The disclosed data are presented in accordance with the recommendations from the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and in accordance with the methodology that is used by EUROSTAT, where the Republic of Macedonia submits its data.   
