I. INFORMATION SYSTEMS 

1. Please describe the current state of computerisation of your country’s administrative IT systems particularly in the following areas: 
a)  Customs import/transit/export/warehousing control, with or without electronic connection of traders (this item relates both to the means by which traders make customs declarations and the means by which customs authorities control them, e.g. risk analysis); 
b)  Collection of import/export statistics; 
c)  Electronic tariff available to traders and customs officials; 
d)  Computerised accountancy system for duties and taxes. 
The Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia is a state executive body within the Ministry of Finance and its job is to provide the necessary measures and procedures for a uniformed functioning of the customs system aimed at implementing the fiscal, protection and control operating policy. The Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia consists of five regions (Customs Houses) with a total of 43 customs locations (customs offices and departments) out of which 36 are interconnected and soon additional 5 customs locations will be linked to the Macedonian Customs Information System (MakCIS). MakCIS is a system that integrates all the computerised customs locations that have LAN (Local Area Network) and have an access to a local or distant server with Asycuda - server application (configured for specific customs office). All the customs MakCIS locations are linked within the WAN (Wide Area Network) of the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia which has two providers. Using the WAN, data is exchanged between the customs locations and the servers of the customs offices and the central server, which is used for both statistical processing and additional statistical data. We have also initiated a process of cutting down on the servers at the customs locations i.e. some smaller customs offices are connected to one server through the WAN. At this moment, complete centralisation is not possible mainly due to the insufficient quality of the communication link offered by the two providers, as well as due to lack of backup access. The users (customs officers and declarants) access Asycuda – the server application via PCs with Asycuda-client application. Locally, the server is accessed through two physically separated LANs, one for the declarants, another for the customs officers. Apart from this, the declarants access the MakCIS using the access service. In the customs locations there is an Internet access from a central location using single link protected by a Firewall. The telecommunication network (WAN) consists of two parts: Frame Relay that links the border customs locations and IP/VPN (Internet Protocol/Virtual Private Network) over MPLS (Multiprotocol Label Switching) which links the internal customs location. The two WANs are designed and have star topology with a central location at the headquarters of the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia in Skopje. Currently we are working on providing system backup. The communication network of the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia uses modern network devices that enable multimedia support of numerous transfer technologies and multimedia services integrations. It is IP (Internet Protocol) based, simplifying the administration functions and reducing the Network congestions. In a functional sense, the network enables Internet/Intranet, e-mail access, access to data from the central server and to all operative servers. The Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia uses Asycuda++ application (version 1.17d) for the customs procedures, which is a computerised customs management system developed by UNCTAD. The system encompasses most of the customs transit procedures; it processes documents for goods inspection, customs declarations, payment procedures and provides confidential and timely statistical data. The reference data are integrated in the system: Harmonised tariff System, declarants, companies, currencies and exchange rates, customs warehouses and all the reference lists that refer to the SAD (Single Administrative Document). It integrates the international standards and codes developed by ISO, WCO, WTO and UN. It provides possibilities and it is configured based on the requirements of the Macedonian legislation  The system has the following features: 1.  Customs procedures: Goods inspection, customs declarations, temporary import/export procedures, customs officers’ management, payment functions, statistical data presentation; 2.  Risk management in the area of declaration processing: complete risk assessment and selectiveness module with an access to the risk analysis information; 3.  Business logic: 20% integrated logic, 80% external customs user-friendly language for a system managed by tax regulation and selectiveness parameters; 4.  Protection: User authentication, symmetrical encryption and 5.  Historic data management (tariff, control tables).  Customs procedures application – Asycuda contains the following modules: 1.  National transit module ( TIR) – MODTRS; 2.  Carrier or manifest module  – MODCAR; 3.  Customs declarations processing module – MODCBR; 4.  Accounting module – MODACC; 5.  Selectivity controls module – MODSEL; 6.  Systems configuration module (MODSYSCF), central head office module (MODCHQ), customs headquarters configuration module (MODCHQCF) and 7.  Brokers module (MODBRK), brokers transit module (MODTRB).  The public enterprises are also MakCIS direct participants: the Public Enterprise for Airport Services, the Macedonian Railway and the Macedonian Post Office. These participants forward data to the MakCIS on the goods that go through the customs and have an opportunity to inspect the goods during the customs procedure that they handle or vouch for. Apart from this, the data from the MakCIS in an electronic format are also used by the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, the State Statistical Office, and the Public Revenue Office. Apart from the customs procedure modules the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia also uses additional applications: 1.  Quota application: daily collection of requests, quantity distribution, quantity registration, preferential treatment; 2.  Application for statistical records on the size of trade and passenger traffic; 3.  Keeping records of empty trucks entering and exiting the country;  4.  Application of offline transit confirmations at the destination customs office; 5.  Application for data collection from the customs offices and data input in the central server database; 6.  Application for recording conversations and keeping records of the interventions at the Customs Coordination Unit;  7.  Applications at the Collection Departments that have the following functions: -  Providing reference data (customs offices, municipalities, postal codes, registered importers/exporters, guarantors (banks), bank guarantees and deposits, types of duties, contracts with MakCIS);  Inflow-outflow records (collecting data from the treasury account on the entry/exit transactions for the Customs Administration accounts (registry, deposit and budget accounts)); Records on the customs documents different from the documents of the customs procedures application (documents for additional payment, documents for duty draw-back, customs travel declaration, guarantees based calculations, deposits calculations, invoices based on MakCIS contracts);Connecting the customs documents and the appropriate inflows/outflows (SAD with adequate payment, duty draw-back documents with adequate payment, customs travel declaration with adequate payment, guarantees based calculations with adequate payment, funds transfer from deposit account to separate account statements, deposits returns, invoice payments register for using the MakCIS); Providing interactivity of the guarantees, debts, adequate payments and customs documents (changing the guarantee level depending on the customs documents’ debt and their adequate payments); Distribution of the paid amounts based on the connection with the customs documents, their structure and adequate payments (creating funds distribution, connection with the treasury info-system and feedback about the completed distribution and draw-back); 8.  Application for data processing regarding cases at the Investigation Unit; 9.  Application for data processing from the INTELL intelligence database; 10. Management electronic reporting system about intelligence and statistical data; 11. Application for registering seizures of drugs, money, excise goods, cultural heritage items and CITES goods. The Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia is connected with the CEN (Customs Enforcement Network) at the WCO; 12. Application for monitoring the radioactive radiation detection (gamma and neutron); 13. Human resources application (personal data, reallocation, trainings, awards, punishments); 14. Customs vehicles application; 15. Salaries calculation application; 16. Application about the financial operating of the Customs Administration (inflow, distribution and outflow of funds); 17. Treasury operation application (e- payment of invoices, their registration) and 18. Application of the assets funds registration (inventory register). 
a) For the purpose of implementing the customs procedures, the declarants submit paper-based documents to the customs authorities. Along with the paper-based documents, electronic format of the same documents are also submitted. With the Asycuda application for electronic processing of the customs documents the following customs procedures are formally and logically controlled: - transit - warehousing - import/temporary import - export/temporary export The application for processing the customs documents enables implementation of the provisions from the Customs Law, the Law on Customs Tariffs, the Law on Value Added Tax and the Free Trade Agreements that the Republic of Macedonia has signed with other countries. Electronic transit processing  When having transit, all types of transport (by air, railway, road) are electronically processed in two types of electronic documents: 1-National transport management document; TIR carnet document for managing the national part of international transport. The electronic form of the 1-National transport management document is filled in and recorded on the server by the declarant. The customs officer reviews it on his/her computer, checks whether the data correspond to the paper-based document, registers it, and the document gets a registration number and registered status. After the goods get to the destination office, the departure office acquires information by mail (copy of the registered document) about the discharge of the transit operation, after which with a special application (offline), the transit declaration gets a validated and cleared status. The electronic form of the TIR carnet document for managing the national part of international transport is filled in by the customs officer. The document gets a registered status and after receiving information (copy of the validated document from the destination office) with a special application (offline) its status is changed to a validated. The information for a selective inspection of goods at the border is recorded in separate boxes of the transit documents. Electronic processing of the goods presentation procedure  Based on the transit documentation data after the discharge of the transit procedure at the destination office, the declarant fills in special electronic format of this document – a manifest. The manifest as required acts as a summary declaration. If the declarant places the goods in a customs warehouse, the declarant along with the manifest also fills an e-form of the SAD-U7 document. The verification of the data in the manifest and the e-form of the SAD-U7 document are checked by the customs officer and s/he changes their status from recorded to registered with a unique registration number for that customs office. The manifest has an option to consolidate/deconsolidate goods from different importers. Each freight bill from the manifest is discharged with the final customs clearance or other customs procedures (i.e. transit). The manifest’s freight bills clearance is automatic. Import/export electronic processing 
The declarant fills in and saves the electronic form of the customs declaration on the server. The customs duties VAT and duty exemption calculation is automatic within the application. The custom officer retrieves the customs declaration using the unique reference number for that customs office. The customs declaration obtains a unique registration number and at the same time the selectiveness method is activated, establishing one of the three control channels: red (physical control), yellow (documents control) and green (no control of goods or documents). Based on the national criteria and the random selection, the envisaged percentage of selected declarations is: 20% red channel, 40% yellow channel, 40% green channel. After adequate control, the customs declaration obtains an assessment status that provides the final duties calculation. After receiving the electronic payment verification the payment entry is confirmed at the customs office.  One of the features of the electronic processing of export is that the procedure ends with a discharge confirmation by the exit border customs office. b)  The processed declarations’ data at the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia are collected by two central servers. They are used for responding to different statistical requirements at the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia. Data from the processed declarations are forwarded to the State Statistical Office and the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia on monthly bases (by the 15 of the current month for the previous month). State Statistical Office is authorised for making the data public and their presentation, while the processing and statistical data at the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia are solely for internal use. c) The electronic form of the customs tariff is available to all interested users of the web page of the Customs Administration of the Republic of Macedonia. It offers information on: -  The system of names of the goods classified in sections and chapters within the Customs Tariff;  -  The system of goods numeration (tariff headings and tariff subheadings) in the Customs Tariff; The rules on goods classification based on the tariff headings and tariff subheadings, as well as the tariff lines in the Customs Tariff;  Customs duties (based on ad valorem or by unit of quantity if required by law) and Mandatory unit of quantity for all tariff lines. The application for processing customs documents enables use of the Customs Tariff in a number of columns in compliance with the Law on Customs Tariff (“Official Gazette of RM” Nos. 23/03 and 69/04), the Decision on Harmonising and Amending the Customs Tariff for 2005 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 86/04) as well as the preferential tariff rates in accordance with the free trade agreements signed by the Republic of Macedonia. d) Accounting and customs debts payments are centralized at the Customs Administration. After duties calculations for certain customs procedures become final and the procedures get their identification, they are automatically registered at the Customs Administration’s accounting office. The registered customs debt is analytically listed, based on registered importers/exporters and sub-analytically, based on the duties and organisational units where it was created.  The treasury system forwards complete information on the payments from the previous day on daily bases. In the course of the current day, temporary information are received on the payments that refer to procedures that have been initiated but have not been completed. Based on the previous identification of the calculated customs debt, the customs debt is automatically closed when it is paid. In case when due to errors in the computer system by those working with the payment operation system the customs procedure cannot be closed after the payment, these procedures are closed manually. Such errors range from 1-2%.  There is an additional quarterly control whether the payment has been made within the legally regulated timeframe. If delay in the payment is registered, an interest rate payment procedure is initiated due to the delay in the payment of the customs debt. Based on these linked customs procedures and their adequate payment, there is daily distribution towards the budget accounts based on the duties structure of the procedures. The Public Revenue Office receives electronically for each registered importer/exporter information on the calculated and paid VAT within the framework of the import procedure. 
2. Please provide information on plans for further computerisation of the above-mentioned areas. 
The future development plans are mainly focused on: Connecting 5 customs locations into the MakCIS – by the end of 2005; -  Reduction of the number of servers at the customs locations by connecting a number of locations to one server – in the course of 2005; Installing a new centralised WEB-oriented application for customs procedures– AsycudaWorld – June 2005; Integrating a new centralised system with the new platform and new database, data migration – by the end of 2005; Introducing and implementing Public Key Interface, digital signature and complete automated electronic exchange of documents –by the end of 2007; -  Computers and the computerised equipment modernisation and updating – in the course of 2005; Designing a new - Intranet version - of the quota application – by the end of 2005; Application of a customs laboratory and data entering on collected samples – June 2005; New human resources management application – by the end of 2006; Application for control and records on public procurements – by the end of 2006; -  Preparations for installing and implementing CCN/CSI (Common Communication Network/Common System Interface) – by the end of 2007; -  Technical preparations for installing and integrating MC (Minimal Common Core) – by the end of 2007 and Exchange of transit massages with the neighbouring countries- by the end of 2007. 