II. PREFERENTIAL TRADE AGREEMENTS 

1. What preferential trade agreements does your country have with third countries? Please provide copies (in one of the official EU languages) of such agreements. 
The Republic of Macedonia currently applies eleven free trade agreements (FTAs).  Nine of these agreements are applied on bilateral basis with the following countries:  -  Serbia and Montenegro, the FTA was concluded on 04.09.1996, implemented as of 16.10.1996 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 59/96); - See 26_Annex_08_01-  Republic of Croatia, the FTA was concluded on 09.05.1997, implemented as of 30.10.1997 (“Official Gazette of RM” Nos. 28/97; 51/02 and 100/02); - See 26_Annex_08_02Republic of Bulgaria, the FTA was concluded on 13.10.1999, implemented as of 01.01.2000 (“Official Gazette of RM” Nos. 83/99 and 100/02); - See 26_Annex_08_03-  Republic of Turkey, the FTA was concluded on 07.09.1999, implemented as of 01.09.2000 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 83/99); - See 26_Annex_08_04-  Ukraine, the FTA was concluded on 18.01.2001, implemented as of 10.09.2001 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 53/01); - See 26_Annex_08_05-  Bosnia and Herzegovina, the FTA was concluded on 24.04.2002, implemented as of 01.07.2002  (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 45/02); - See 26_Annex_08_06-  Republic of Albania, the FTA was concluded on 29.03.2002, implemented as of 15.07.2002 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 47/02); - See 26_Annex_08_07-  Romania, the FTA was concluded on 07.02.2003, implemented as of 01.01.2004 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 52/03); - See 26_Annex_08_08Republic of Moldova, the FTA was concluded on 28.01.2004, implemented as of 01.01.2005 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 77). - See 26_Annex_08_09Two of the FTAs are applied on multilateral basis:  Free Trade Agreement with the EFTA states (Switzerland, Norway, Iceland and Lichtenstein), concluded on 19.06.2000, implemented as of 01.05.2002 (Official Gazette of RM” Nos. 89/01 and 62/03); and - See 26_Annex_08_10-  Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Communities and their Member States (Interim Agreement on Trade and Trade Related Matters) implemented as of 01.06.2001.  The aim of the Republic of Macedonia is creation of an open market economy. The strategy is through free trade agreements to overcome the disadvantage of a small market economy and to obtain duty free access for goods originating from its territory. Among other with these agreements a regional trade integration of the countries in South-East Europe shall be achieved. This integration is with a purpose of preparing the economic entities easier to achieve integration in the EU. The free trade agreements facilitate trade in industrial and agricultural products under preferential treatment. The preferential treatment in fact, envisages immediate or gradual decrease of customs duties for various groups of products, originating from the concerned country.  These FTA’s contain articles that regulate issues under specific WTO agreements such as: safeguard measures, antidumping measures, intellectual property, public procurements etc.  To date, the Republic of Macedonia has achieved a high degree of trade liberalization, which is a result of the long term, continuous application of the free trade agreements.  The Republic of Macedonia has concluded symmetrical free trade agreements with: Serbia and Montenegro, Republic of Croatia, Republic of Albania, Republic of Bulgaria, Romania, and with the Republic of Moldova. There are also asymmetrical Free Trade Agreements in favour of the Republic of Macedonia concluded with: the Ukraine, Republic of Turkey, EFTA states and EU member-states. The only asymmetrical free trade agreement that the Republic of Macedonia has concluded in favour of the other contracting party is the FTA with Bosnia and Herzegovina. At present, the Republic of Macedonia has 95% liberalization of the trade in industrial and agricultural products with: Serbia and Montenegro, Republic of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. This level of liberalization of the trade in industrial products with Serbia and Montenegro and with the Republic of Croatia was achieved in 2000.  In fact, the achieved level of liberalization in the trade with Serbia and Montenegro is 99%. Only 1% of the industrial (non-ferrous metallurgy exclusively) and agricultural products in the trade with Serbia and Montenegro is subject to annual quantitative restrictions.  The trade liberalization level with the Republic of Croatia is 95%. Only 5% of the trade with the Republic of Croatia in agricultural products are subject to reduced or full customs duties without quantitative restrictions.  The trade liberalization level with the Republic of Croatia as of 01.01.2005 is 97%.  The entire imports of industrial and agricultural products from Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Republic of Macedonia have been liberalized upon entry into force of the Agreement i.e. as of 01.07.2002. Macedonian industrial and agricultural product exports to this country are gradually liberalized. Hence, as of 01.01.2005, Macedonian exports in these products will be under the 0% regime.  The trade liberalization level with the Republic of Albania is 60%. The liberalization level in the trade with industrial products is 70%, while the liberalization level in the trade with agricultural products is 50%. The other 50% of the agricultural products are traded under annual quotas without customs duties, while those outside the quotas and those not under the quota system, are under the MFN treatment. As of 01.01.2007, the level of liberalization of the trade in industrial products between the two countries will be 100%.  The Republic of Macedonia has about 90% liberalization level of the trade only in industrial products with: the Republic of Bulgaria, Romania, and the Republic of Moldova. This liberalization percentage was achieved in 2004. The remaining 10% will be liberalized on 01.01.2005 with the Republic of Bulgaria, on 01.01.2008 with Romania and on 01.01.2009 with Moldova. Only the most sensitive industrial products are subject to customs duties in the above referred to transitional periods.  The Free Trade Agreements of the Republic of Macedonia with the Republic of Turkey and with the EFTA countries facilitate full liberalization of the Macedonian exports of industrial products to the markets of these countries, upon entry into force of the respective Free Trade Agreements.  On the other hand, as of 01.01.2008 there will be full liberalization of the Turkish exports of industrial products to the Macedonian market, and as of 01.01.2011 there will be such liberalization for the EFTA countries.  The Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the Ukraine facilitates full liberalization of the Macedonian exports of industrial products as of 2005, as well as full liberalization of import of the sensitive Ukrainian industrial products as of 2007 and as of 2010 for the most sensitive industrial products.  The liberalization of the trade in agricultural products with the Republic of Bulgaria, Republic of Turkey, the Ukraine, Romania and Moldova is applied under annual tariff quotas. After the quotas have been used, as is the case of other agricultural products which are not subject to tariff quotas, the trade in these products is subject to full customs duties.  The multilateral Free Trade Agreement with the EFTA countries regulates the trade in agricultural products in separate Protocols on Agriculture with each country, which facilitate liberalization by setting forth quota or quota free regime with customs duties lower than the regularly applied ones. Upon the amendments and supplements to the Agreement with the EFTA countries (2003), Switzerland, Iceland, Lichtenstein and Norway facilitate greater liberalization of the Macedonian exports of agricultural products.  In April 2004, the Republic of Macedonia officially presented its application for accession to the CEFTA. In June 2004, the application of the Republic of Macedonia was officially accepted by the CEFTA countries,. The first multilateral meeting of the expert groups on the negotiations for membership of the Republic of Macedonia to CEFTA was held on 13-14.09. 2004. Furthermore two rounds of bilateral negotiations were held. The negotiations of the Republic of Macedonia with the CEFTA member-countries (Romania, Republic of Bulgaria, and the Republic of Croatia) are aimed at facilitating greater liberalization than the one currently applied under bilateral Free Trade Agreements with these countries.  Upon accession of the Republic of Macedonia to the CEFTA, the bilateral Free Trade Agreements with the Republic of Bulgaria, Republic of Croatia and Romania will be replaced with the CEFTA Agreement.  
2. Has there been any global analysis by your national authorities of the differences between these agreements and those that the Community might have with the same third countries? If yes, please provide us with the findings of such analysis. If no, is such analysis planned? Please provide any relevant details of such plans. 
A global comparative analysis of the Macedonian preferential trade agreements and the preferential trade agreements that EU has with third countries has not been conducted thus far. There is certain information about the contents of some of these agreements of EU with third countries. The Republic of Macedonia plans to conduct a global analysis after acquiring a formal status of a candidate country. 
3. How far have you progressed in the renegotiation of your Free Trade Agreement with Serbia and Montenegro? 
Trade between the Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro is governed by the Free Trade Agreement concluded in 1996, in accordance with the respective national legislations of the two countries. In June 2001, both parties to the Agreement agreed to amend and supplement the Agreement in compliance with the rules and provisions of the WTO and the EU regulations.  In June 2001, the Joint Committee in charge of the unimpeded implementation of the Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia established a Joint Sub-Committee to prepare the amendments and supplements to the Trade Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.  The Sub-Committee for amendments and supplements to the Trade Agreement fully harmonized the text of the Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro, including the text of the Protocol on Origin of Goods by February 2003. The only remaining open issues are related to the Annexes that regulate the quantitative restrictions of small number of industrial (ferrous metallurgy only) products and agriculture-food products.  The Sub-Committee already held four meetings and it continues to work intensively on the harmonization of the Annexes on goods that are under quantitative restrictions according to the existing trade agreement.  The Macedonian side has been continuously proposing full liberalization of the trade in ferrous metallurgy products upon entry into force of the harmonized text of the Agreement, proposing also further liberalization of the agriculture-food products subject to quotas in a transitional period of three years, starting with 2004. By this, the entire trade with Serbia and Montenegro would be customs duty free as of 2006.  These Macedonian proposals have not been accepted by Serbia and Montenegro that has insisted on two proposals: 1. setting up quotas for new agricultural products (grapes, tomatoes, cucumbers and gherkins, wine, watermelons and peppers); or 2. drafting a new text of the Agreement with entirely new lists of customs quotas for the most sensitive agricultural and industrial products.  Considering that the trade liberalization level in accordance with the applicable Trade Agreement is 99% as of 2000, the Republic of Macedonia has underlined that both parties to the Agreement should be aimed at further enhancing the trade liberalization, in the spirit of the implementation of the Memorandum on Trade Facilitation and Liberalization under the Stability Pact, which stipulates that, the countries in the Region should attain 90% trade liberalization level in the industrial and agricultural sectors by 2007.  Since, due to such opposed positions no agreement could be reached within the Sub-Committee, it was proposed that the Joint Committee for the Implementation of the Trade Agreement, headed by the Ministers of Economy of both countries, decide on the proposals.  In July 2004, at the session of the Joint Committee, Serbia and Montenegro proposed several alternatives:  1.  Full liberalization of the lists of agricultural and industrial products, which are currently under quantitative restrictions as of 01.01.2005 and 2.  Introduction of quotas for Macedonian: 1. grapes, tomatoes, cucumbers, gherkins, wine, watermelons and peppers  with 0% in-quota customs duty and 50% of MFN duty outside the quota; and 2. apples, fresh baking yeast, vermouth, and other wines and tobacco with duty-free access for quantities inside the quota and gradual reduction of the out-of-quota MFN rate over a four-year transition period.  The Macedonian side pointed out that introducing quotas for agriculture products would be possible only if they are allocated on ‘first come - first served’ basis, which would help avoid any administrative delays caused by the licensing procedures. The Republic of Macedonia has been applying this principle as of 2001, in the trade with all countries with which it has free trade agreements, including Serbia and Montenegro.  The import quotas in Serbia and Montenegro are distributed by a quota distribution committee, which could hinder the timely exports of Macedonian products subject to such quotas.  
4. How far have you progressed in the negotiation of a Free Trade Agreement with UNMIK/Kosovo? 
After UNMIK’s involvement in the work of the Stability Pact Task Force on Trade Liberalization and Facilitation in September 2003, later in December the same year, UNMIK raised the initiative for conclusion of a Free Trade Agreement between the Republic of Macedonia and the UNMIK for the territory of Kosovo. This initiative is based on UNMIK’s endeavours for economic integration of the territory of Kosovo in the region.  The trade between the Republic of Macedonia and Kosovo is currently governed by the Free Trade Agreement with the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, under which 99% of the products are traded duty-free.  The negotiations with UNMIK for the conclusion of an Interim Free Trade Protocol started in the second half of December 2004.   