A. SUMMARY INFORMATION 

1. The Treaty on European Union includes in Title V provisions on Common Foreign and Security Policy which new Member States will apply. The Commission wishes to know whether, in your view, the application of these provisions upon accession could give rise to any problems or difficulties. More precisely: a) Will you from the time of accession be ready and able to participate fully and actively in the CFSP (including ESDP) as defined in the TEU? b) Are you prepared to accept unreservedly the future definition, legal structure and organisational arrangements for the Union’s CSFP, including its military dimension, that may be implemented after the ratification of the Constitutional Treaty? c) Will you, upon accession, take on in their entirety and without reservations the objectives of the Treaty, the provisions of its Title V, and of the declaration attached to it, as well as the relevant international agreements concluded on behalf of the EU, and other relevant sources of the CFSP acquis? d) Will you be ready and able to support the relevant specific policies of the Union in force at the time of accession? e) Will your administration, and in particular the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, have the necessary structure and technical equipment to take fully part in the CFSP at the time of accession? 
The Republic of Macedonia strongly supports the efforts of the European Union to further enhance its role as a cohesive force in international relations and its ability to promote the European interests and values on the international scene. The Republic of Macedonia has continually made a contribution to this end through building partnership relations with the EU and through accepting and implementing the European values and principles.  The Strategic objective for membership of the EU also entails the commitment of the Republic of Macedonia to be ready and able, at the time of accession, to actively and fully participate in the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP), including the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP), as its constitutive part. The Republic of Macedonia is ready to fully and unreservedly accept the  acquis communautaire of the CFSP in its entirety and has already been developing domestic legal mechanisms, instruments and capacities for active and comprehensive participation in the CFSP, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter V of the Treaty on the European Union.   The fundamental human and civil rights and freedoms, the rule of law, humanism, social justice and solidarity, respect for the widely established norms of international law, are among the basic values of the constitutional order of the Republic of Macedonia. These values, along with the principles of promotion of international cooperation, preservation of peace and strengthening of international security, in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter and the international law, as well as the principles of the Helsinki Final Act and the objectives of the Paris Charter, are also fundamental principles of its foreign policy.  Based on the concurrence of these fundamental values and principles, the Republic of Macedonia fully accepts the objectives and principles of the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy. Hence derives the readiness of the Republic of Macedonia to actively and unreservedly support the foreign and security policy of the Union in a spirit of loyalty and mutual solidarity. In the framework of its European integration process, the Republic of Macedonia commenced to gradually accept the EU CFSP Acquis and to align its positions and activities on international foreign policy issues with those of the EU. A contribution to accelerating this process has also been made by the inter-ministerial Working Group on Harmonisation with the EU CFSP Acquis, led by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, with the participation of the Ministries of Defence, Interior, Economy, Finance/Customs Administration, the Legislative Secretariat, etc.  The Republic of Macedonia supports the development of the European Security and Defence Policy and the efforts for strengthening civilian and military instruments, capacities and capabilities of the EU for pursuing the strategic objectives of the European Security Strategy.  The Republic of Macedonia implements a profound and comprehensive reform of its security and defence system. It is based upon the strategic guidelines set out in the National Security and Defence Concept and the Policy Framework of the Strategic Defence Review. The Security Policy of the Republic of Macedonia rests upon the protection of the fundamental state values, securing conditions for long-term development of capabilities and capacities that will contribute to greater involvement in international activities, addressing new security challenges, primarily the fight against terrorism, organised crime, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, illicit trade of any kind, etc. The ongoing process of transformation and adaptation of the Macedonian defence system is aimed at meeting NATO membership criteria and thus increasing the ability of the Republic of Macedonia to make its own contribution to the development of the defence dimension of the European Union. This process involves upgrading the instruments for implementing the defence policy; improving the defence and armed forces control and command instruments and procedures; restructuring, resizing, equipping and professionalisation of the Army; redesigning the military educational and training system.  The absence of conventional threats against the Republic of Macedonia and the increase of non-conventional and global asymmetrical threats have strengthened the commitment to pool our resources with the partners in the region and with the Alliance. The Republic of Macedonia, within the available capacities, is prepared to do the same with the EU, considering the consistency and compatibility of the European Security and Defence Policy with the European Security and Defence Identity.  The Republic of Macedonia will continue to upgrade its civilian and military operational capacities to be able to actively participate in the ESDP in the course of its accession to the EU. In this regard, the lessons learned from the first EU Military Mission – Concordia and the EU Advisory Police Mission – Proxima will certainly be helpful. As a Member State, the Republic of Macedonia will be prepared for a more considerable engagement in the international conflict prevention and crisis management missions led by the EU, in accordance with the principles of the UN Charter, thus making active contribution to further strengthening the EU role on the international scene.  The Republic of Macedonia has begun to undertake the required activities to be ready and able to support the relevant specific policies of the Union in the field of CFSP and ESDP. Falling within this framework, for example, is the unilateral acceptance of the European Code of Conduct on Arms Exports (01.11.2004) and the resolve to accept the remaining security related export control documents of the EU.  The Republic of Macedonia closely followed the work of the European Convention, which resulted in the adoption of the EU Constitutional Treaty. The basic principles of the foreign policy of the Republic of Macedonia and its vision of building relations with third countries and international organisations of regional and universal character are in accordance with the basic principles and goals of the Union's external action, as well as with the constitutional provisions pertaining to the CFSP and the Common Security and Defence Policy. Consequently, the Republic of Macedonia, as a future Member State of the EU, will fully and unreservedly accept the future definition, legal structure and organisational arrangements of the Union’ CFSP, including its military dimension that may be implemented upon the entry into force of the Constitutional Treaty, while in the time until accession it will undertake measures for deeper involvement in the activities of the Union in this regard.  The commitment of the Republic of Macedonia to be ready and able to fully and actively take part in the CFSP at the time of accession entails its commitment to adequately enhance and adapt the existing institutional and technical organisation, as well as to establish additional organisational mechanisms and/or institutional structures that may be necessary for implementing this policy.   In this context, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs as well as the other relevant institutions of the state administration continually work on the improvement of their own organisational structure and technical capacity, as well as on human resources development, so that at the time of accession they would be fully prepared to take over their role within the CFSP. The Law on Foreign Affairs, envisaged to be adopted in 2005, will also make a contribution to a more efficient implementation of certain segments of the CFSP.  
