II. PROTECTION OF THE EURO AGAINST COUNTERFEITING  

22. What are the procedures and bodies established for the fight against counterfeiting? 
The fight against counterfeiting money in the Republic of Macedonia encompasses the following procedures: All counterfeit or suspicious MKD banknotes and coins are submitted to the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, where its professional sector performs expertise and technical analysis of the counterfeit, i.e. suspicious notes. The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia informs the financial institutions, especially the public, about the findings, and submits a copy of the counterfeit banknotes to the financial institutions as well. For all disclosed counterfeits, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia submits a report to the Ministry of Internal Affairs, along with a transcript of the expertise, as well as one copy of the previously prepared report on the counterfeiting and then they agree on undertaking joint measures for stamping out counterfeiting money. All suspicious samples of Euro banknotes and coins and of other foreign currencies are submitted to the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Macedonia and the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia is in charge of performing technical analysis. The expertise is performed by the Sector for criminal – technical expertise and afterwards the findings are submitted to the Sector for criminal police. Upon appearance of greater amount of forged money in an organized form, the Ministry of Internal Affairs informs the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia and the public. The fight against counterfeiting money falls within the competences of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Macedonia, i.e. the Sector for criminal police, which, together with the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia organizes and undertakes the necessary operational and tactical and other measures. 
23. Have authorities been designated for the centralisation and processing of information concerning counterfeit banknotes and coins? Have authorities been designated for the technical analysis of counterfeit banknotes and coins? 
In the Republic of Macedonia, the institutions responsible for centralisation and processing the information concerning counterfeit banknotes and coins are strictly defined, as well as their competences for technical analysis. For this purpose, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, on the basis of Article 72 of the Law on the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 3/02,51/03,85/03,40/04) and the Decision on the manner of operation with banknotes and coins in the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, Decision No. 02-15/II-92 as of 05.10.1992, Guidelines were prepared on prevention of counterfeiting money, Decision No. 126/94. In accordance with the Guidelines, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia is responsible for performing technical analysis and central collection and processing of information for counterfeit MKD banknotes and coins, whereas the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Macedonia (Sector for criminal – technical expertise) is responsible for performing technical analysis, i.e. forensics regarding counterfeit Euros and other foreign currency banknotes and coins. The Ministry of Internal Affairs, i.e. the Sector for criminal police is pointed as responsible for recording all registered counterfeit banknotes of the MKD, EUR and other foreign currency banknotes and coins and to undertake all legal actions against counterfeiting banknotes and coins. 
24. Have any procedures been defined for the gathering and indexation of statistical data relating to counterfeit banknotes and coins (both for the euro and other currencies)? 
In the Republic of Macedonia, there are procedures defined for collecting and indexing statistical data referring to forgery of banknotes and coins.  In accordance with the Guidelines on Preventing Money Forgery, prepared by the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, Decision No. 126/94, a procedure is determined for technical analysis and marking the types of forgeries, as well as keeping records on the forgeries, relating to: -  type of forgery – banknotes or coins and the date of issue of the authentic money, denominations; type of forgery – manner of producing the forgery and for the persons committing the forgery; number of forgeries – number of forgeries of one type disclosed in circulation, i.e. with forgers and distributors after their potential arrest; time and place of distributing the forgeries – connected to the number of forgeries discovered in one place; and name of the forgers and whether the distributors of the forged money are known or arrested. The Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of Macedonia, i.e. the Sector for criminal – technical expertise, carries out procedure for technical analysis and marking of forged foreign currencies, in accordance with the international standards and criteria. This Sector keeps statistical record according to serial numbers, type of forgery, quality of paper, printing etc. In accordance with the Interpol standards, a report is prepared for every confiscation of forged money under standardized procedure. 
25. Have any procedures been defined for the transmission of examples of counterfeit notes and coins and related information to the relevant authorities inside or outside your country? 
The Guidelines on preventing the money forgery, No. 126/94, adopted by the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, strictly defines the procedures for transfer of samples of forged currencies and banknotes in the Republic of Macedonia, as well as the procedures for presenting appropriate information to the competent bodies inside and outside our country. Internal informing is carried out by the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, which submits the previously prepared report on the findings and a copy of the sample of the discovered forgery, to the financial institutions and the Ministry of Internal Affairs – Department for criminal police and Department for police.  External informing is the responsibility of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The Department for criminal police informs EUROPOL and INTERPOL on the emergence of forged Euros, whereas regarding other the forged foreign currencies and coins, it reports directly to the police services of the respective countries the forgery of which is detected. The reports include information on to the forgeries, perpetrators of crimes and the discovered printing shops. 
26. Does national legislation provide for the obligation of credit institutions to withdraw from circulation all banknotes and coins which they know or have sufficient reason to believe to be counterfeit and to hand them over to the competent authorities? Have any sanctions been defined in the case this obligation is not complied with? 
On the basis of the Decision on the manner of operating with banknotes and coins No. 02-15/III-92 as of October 15, 2002, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia adopted the Guidelines on preventing money forgery, No. 126/1994, which is compulsory for all banks, savings houses and post offices in the Republic of Macedonia. In the Guidelines on preventing money forgery, the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia specifically prescribed and obliged all credit institutions to withdraw all banknotes and coins for which they know or have sufficient reasons to believe that they are forged. After retaining the suspicious samples or forgeries, the credit institutions are obliged to immediately inform the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia and the Ministry of Internal Affairs and to submit the suspicious samples to the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia for technical analysis. The Guidelines envisage an obligation for the bank, the savings house or the post office, if, during their operations, they disclose forged banknotes or coins, to immediately take away the cash and inform the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The bank is obliged, in case of forged MKD banknotes, to deliver the suspicious or forged samples to the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia for conducting expertise, and if necessary, the National Bank will consult the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The suspicious or forged samples of foreign currency are submitted to the Department for criminal police – Sector for criminology within the Ministry of Internal Affairs, for technical analysis. Regarding the issue whether sanctions are envisaged in case of incompliance with the specified obligations, Article 268 of the Criminal Code (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 37/96, 80/99, 4/2002, 43/2003 and 19/2004), imprisonment for a period of 1 to 10 years is envisaged for the person who produces forge money with an intention to put them in circulation as authentic. Imprisonment for a period of 1 to 10 years is envisaged for the person who obtains forged money with an intention to put them in circulation as authentic. Article 268, paragraph 4 of the Criminal Code, envisages for the person who took forged money as authentic and put them in circulation, or the person who knew that forged money are produced or put in circulation, and failed to report it, to be fined or imprisoned from 1 to 3 years. 
27. Have modalities been created to transmit examples of counterfeit banknotes and coins to bodies outside your country? 
The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia is authorized and obliged to collect, record and perform expertise on the forged MKD banknotes. The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia submits all suspicious EUR banknotes or other foreign currency received upon any basis, to the Ministry of Internal Affairs for an expertise, recording and further procedure. The National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia does not submit samples of forgery to institutions outside our country. Once a year, the Ministry of Internal Affairs provides Interpol with information on Euro forgery. Regarding other foreign currencies, the Ministry of Internal Affairs submits the information on forgeries directly to the police of the respective country - issuer of the currency. 