INSPECTION SUPERVISION SECTOR FOOD DIRECTORATE DIRECTOR Manager of the Inspection Supervision SectorManager of Import/export Department Department managers
Tetovo Gostivar Debar Kichevo M. Brod Bitola Ohrid Struga Prilep Resen D. Hisar Krushevo Skopje Veles Negotino Kavadarci Radovish Strumica Valandovo Krushevo Kumanovo K. Palanka Delchevo Berovo Vinica Kochani Shtip Sv. Nikole Probishtip Kratovo Petrovec Ariport Fershped terminal B. crossing - Blace Veles terminal Skopje Agro-Kumanovo terminal B. crossing Tabanovce Kumanovo B. crossing Deve Bair B. crossing Delchevo Delchevo terminal B. crossing Novo Selo Strumica terminal B. crossing Bogorodica Gevgelija terminal Kavadarci terminal B. crossing Dojranн B. crossing Medjitlija Bitola terminal B. crossing Kjafasan  Struga terminal B. crossing Sv. Naum Ohrid terminal B. crossing Jazhince Tetovo terminal Shtip terminal Prilep terminal 

f)  With the annual plan the Food Directorate controls foodstuff producing organisations by clear guidelines to regional inspectors. The programme provides and develops the method and choice of taking samples, as well as the analysis parameters that need to be prepared, for each of the finished foodstuffs series. Laboratory analysis shall be carried out for all product safety parameters. On the basis of the Inspectorate programme, the regional units develop detailed plans that, in addition to taking samples for laboratory examination, cover the activities related to the control and inspection of the facilities for food production and circulation, their hygiene conditions, the hygiene of the employees in production and of the people in direct contact with food. One of the projected activities is carrying out food monitoring for the purpose of establishing various nutrients, contaminants, additives and other ingredients and matter in order to establish the intake of individual matter in the organism and to assess the risk to humans from consuming unsafe food.  The Republic Healthcare Bureau, Skopje, and the ten healthcare institutes implement the minimal annual plans for taking drinking water samples. The number and the samples taken are regulated with the Rulebook on the safety of drinking water (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 57/04), which corresponds to European legislation.  
g)  The Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) is in the function of creating normative and legal acts and with the establishment of the Food Directorate it is planned to develop a guide on good production practice, a guide on good laboratory practice, as well as a guide for the application of the HACCP system. The guides will be developed in cooperation with all the entities working in the field of food safety.  
h)  There is a planned system of inspection service review. Each inspector shall be up for review twice a year on randomly chosen cases where decisions for prohibition have been issued, cases for which the inspector filed a request for initiation of misdemeanour procedure to the court or upon complaints (most often lodged by the Consumer Association). The first control is from the department manager, then from the sector manager on the basis of the volume of activities carried out, delivered monthly, periodical or annual reports, and by way of inspection of decisions. Administration control is carried out entirely on the field by the Ministry of Health through the Inspectorate. In accordance with the Law on Civil servants, there shall be evaluation of completed work of the inspectors.  This type of control has proven successful as regards the carried out situation analysis for a period of three years and it is considered that the Food Directorate will carry out control with the same plan, but, in that, will take into account all European experiences with a positive result.  i)  According to the existing condition, the inspector of the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate is authorised to prohibit the import of unsafe foodstuffs and to determine a procedure for such foodstuffs. The inspector can order return to the export country, its destruction if such a procedure does not pollute the environment or, at the proposal of an expert organisation, to put it to a different purpose following additional analyses.  The decision of the food inspector is final in the administrative procedure and can be challenged with an appeal to the Ministry of Health or to the competent court.  In cases where there are indications that there is unsafe foodstuffs on the market, regardless the fact whether it is of domestic or other origin, the Food Directorate from 01.01.2005 issues following the inspection a decision for withdrawal of the food from circulation. In the event of food poisoning, the food inspector, in cooperation with an epidemiologist from the regional healthcare institute, shall go out on the field to the facility for which there is suspicion that it is the source of a disease outbreak, they shall establish the hygiene condition of the facility, take samples of the food found in the facility for analysis and shall order measures provided in the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) (temporary prohibition of the work of the facility, removing from the work place persons suspected to be carriers, measures for DDD and other measures). Following the completion of all analyses, depending on the obtained results, they shall initiate a procedure (penal measures) against the legal and responsible person. The penal measures can be fines, closure of the facility from three months to a year and if detriment of health of the persons who have consumed unsafe food is proven, criminal charges shall be filed as well.  
j)  The food imported into the Republic of Macedonia for the purpose of putting into circulation must satisfy the provisions of the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02). The supervision of sanitary safety of foodstuffs imported into the Republic of Macedonia is the responsibility of the import-export inspection supervision department, and it is carried out by food inspectors at customs terminals and public customs warehouses on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia.  The inspection of the safety of imported food on the part of the Food Directorate, import-export inspection supervision department, is carried out at customs terminals. The customs service cannot clear customs before the foodstuff inspectors establish foodstuff safety and approve its import with a decision. It is required that the shipment always carries a sanitary certificate from an authorised institution of the exporting country.  The coordination of the work of inspectors for imported-exported foodstuffs is carried out centrally by the manager of the department with offices in the Food Directorate; all inspectors shall be provided with guidelines for the actions of each issue in the field of activities, and the relevant notifications shall be delivered. The manager directly organises and focuses the work of the foodstuff inspectors on the field. Feedback is delivered with the regular monthly reports on the activities and manager controls carried out. The establishment of IT support will enable daily data input in the central database at the Food Directorate.  Furthermore, the Food Directorate is incorporated in the National Strategy on Integrated Border Management and the National Operative Plan for Integrated Border Management in the Republic of Macedonia, funded by the EU and managed by the European Agency for Reconstruction. 
3. Please apply similar questions in the case of other structures and procedures (existing or to be set up) relating to: a) the application for novel food, including GMOs; b) the food assessment body for novel food, including GMOs; c) the Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed (RASFF); d) approval of irradiation facilities, if any; e) any other procedure for authorisation/accreditation as provided for in the EU legislation. Please describe the current status and the foreseen evolution with a precise timetable. 
a)  There are currently no mechanisms in the Republic of Macedonia for GMO control in foodstuffs. In the event of suspicion of such foodstuffs, the Ministry of Health forwards examination samples to accredited laboratories in EU countries.  Foodstuffs containing GMO, according to the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 54/2002), fall under “food produced by innovative technology”:   food produced by new procedures causing substantial changes to the use of the food;   consisting of or containing GMO;   containing ingredients with newly or deliberately modified primary molecular structures;   consisting of or isolated from plants grown in a non-traditional fashion and for which there is no experience of safe use. The applying procedure for "novel" foodstuffs shall be regulated by adopting special provisions based on the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 54/02), which shall be within the competence of the Food Directorate.  b) Does not exist. 
c)  In cooperation with the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Veterinary Directorate and other relevant institutions, monitoring of the sanitary safety of foodstuffs and animal feed will be carried out, scientific studies will be developed on establishing a unified methodology for risk assessment at all stages of production, on foodstuffs and animal feed processing and distribution, as well as on promoting the process of risk assessment regionally. 
d)  The general conditions for start of work for facilities using radioactive sources are laid down in the Law on Protection from Ionizing Radiation and Radiation Safety (“Official Gazette of RM” No.  48/2002).  No special regulations for approving/licensing irradiation facilities in the Republic of Macedonia have been adopted. In the Republic of Macedonia there are no irradiation facilities or a detailed act regulating this issue.  The Republic of Macedonia does not have standards for food processed by way of irradiation. For future evolution see answer to the question 22_II_J_3

) Does not exist. 
