Food Directorate Organization Ministry of Health  MinisterFood Directorate  DirectorMacedonian Codex Commission Inspection supervision sectorDevelopment sector Administrative and legal matters sector Organisation Chart A: 3/1 



























zdrav tvoExpert advisory body 
inisterstvo za
Ministry of Health MAFWEME MoEPP
Macedonian Codex Commission   Food Directorate   Development sector areas/ Administrative and legal matters sector Inspection supervision sector Inspection supervision units- export/import5 regional inspection supervision units Struga,Ohrid,Resen,Bitola,Demir Hisar,Prilep,Kru{evo 8 insp + 2 insp
Skopje 14 inspectors + 4 inspectors Tetovo, Gostivar, Debar, Kichevo, Makedonski Brod
insp
insp.Kumanovo, Kriva Palanka, Delchevo, Berovo, Vinica, Kochani, Shtip, Sveti Nikole, Probishtip, Kratovo Scientific advisory and international cooperation departmentRisk analysis and assessment departmentIT and public relations departmentRisk information departmentAdministrative and legal matters – human resources department Administrative matters and IT departmentStruga, Ohrid, Resen, Bitola, Demir Hisar, Prilep, Krushevo 8 insp + 2 insp Veles, Negotino, Kavadarci, Radovish, Strumica, Valandovo, Gevgelija 8 insp. + 2 insp. Tetovo, Gostivar, Debar, Kichevo, M. Brod 5 insp.+1 insp 10 insp. + 2 insp. Source: Ministry of Health, Food Directorate The Food Directorate shall publish expert and administrative matters related to food of non-animal origin and it will be accountable for its work before the Minister of Health.  The Food Directorate as a new body within the Ministry of Health is a central authority in charge of inspection and supervision of the entire foodstuff chain. The main objective is to undertake steps to guarantee that the foodstuffs produced, distributed or labelled in the country are in conformity with the highest foodstuff safety and hygiene standards, as well as to guarantee that the foodstuffs are in conformity with the legal requirements and that they are consistent with the codes of good stuff practice. In addition to official control of foodstuff safety, the Food Directorate participates in the development of regulations in the field of food, it organises inspector education, develops guides for good production practices, good laboratory practices, guides for applying the HACCP system, etc. The Food Directorate forwards all information related to foodstuff hazards and it establishes coordination of the information system with other services involved in this field. The Food Directorate started to operate as a body on 1.01.2005. The primary programme objective of the Food Directorate is the protection of consumer health and protection from misguidance by establishing a new institutional system for carrying out expert and administrative matters in the field of food safety, as well as by reforming the food control system in accordance with EU legislation and by observing the WTO membership commitments.  In addition to carrying out safety control (ingredients, contaminants, microbiological safety), the Directorate shall undertake the previous activities of the Ministry of Economy concerning quality control of foodstuffs, which includes quality analysis (ingredients, label conformity) Thus, the overlapping of control in both ministries will be disabled, costs will be reduced and proper regular food control procedures shall be established. Control of food of animal origin is within the competence of the Veterinary Administration within the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy. The Food Directorate, as a competent food control body in the Republic of Macedonia, shall coordinate all activities with the Veterinary Administration as regards the monitoring the quality and safety control of food. The competence of the Food Directorate covers several aspects of implementing a food safety policy in accordance with WTO, gathering and analyzing data as a basis for undertaking measures for transparent information and consumer protection. According to EU regulations, this Directorate analyses data and information from other relevant institutions and it performs full data analysis, enabling identification and monitoring of risks with direct or indirect influence on the safety of products (in accordance with Regulations 178/2002/EC, 882/2004/EC and 852/2004/EC). Cooperation and coordination between the Ministries also takes place through the scientific advisory inter-ministerial body (Macedonian Codex Commission - MCC) and through the committees working within the Food Directorate. The inclusion of the Macedonian Consumer Association will enable immediate involvement of consumer requirements for quality and safety. However, in addition to this, the Directorate has a coordination, communication and promotion department, enabling transparent communication of information to the Government, consumers and the international community. There are 3 sectors with 12 units within the Directorate, as follows: Administrative and legal matters sector 
The administrative and legal matters sector carries out normative and legal issues, and expert work for performing the primary activity of the Food Directorate, human resources, as well as for the work of the IT analytic system for logistic support of the overall work. The administrative and legal matters, and human resources unit prepares regulations within the competence of the Food Directorate, develops guides for inspection supervision, good production practices, good hygiene practices, the HACCP system, good laboratory practices, monitoring application of regulations and other secondary legislation acts within the competence of the Directorate, it develops a strategy for training foodstuff inspectors and keeping records of the training and other activities. The administrative matters and IT unit carries out normative and legal, and expert work for performing the primary activity of the Food Directorate, human resources, as well as for the work of the IT analytic system for logistic support of the overall work. Inspection supervision sector The Inspection supervision sector carries out the work and tasks concerning control of foodstuff and products and materials in contact with foodstuffs, through monitoring the implementation of regulations in the field of food of non-animal origin. The inspection supervision units carry out the work and tasks concerning: Unit 1 carries out inspection supervision in the area of the city of Skopje with its municipalities. Unit 2 carries out inspection supervision in the area of the municipalities: Tetovo, Gostivar, Debar, Kichevo and Makedonski Brod; Unit 3 carries out inspection supervision in the area of the municipalities: Struga, Ohrid, Resen, Bitola, Demir Hisar, Prilep and Krushevo; Unit 4 carries out inspection supervision in the area of the municipalities: Veles, Negotino, Kavadarci, Radovish, Strumica, Valandovo and Gevgelija; Unit 5 carries out inspection supervision in the area of the municipalities: Kumanovo, Kriva Palanka, Delchevo, Berovo, Vinica, Kochani, Shtip, Sveti Nikole, Probishtip and Kratovo. 
Import and export, inspection supervision unit carry out the work and tasks concerning: control of food and products and materials in contact with foodstuffs in import and export. Development sector This sector carries out identification, analysis, assessment and communication of risk with regard to the sanitary safety of foodstuffs for the purpose of timely prevention of all potential hazards, as well as for applying scientific knowledge regarding foodstuff safety and enabling international cooperation of interest for the work of the Food Directorate. The scientific advisory matters and international cooperation unit ensures the consistency of procedures for developing scientific opinions, develops procedures for harmonizing working methods, on the basis of opinions of scientific committees,  it prepares expert and scientific view on various types of foodstuff as potential risks to human health, issues opinions and approvals for producing foodstuff with special nutrition use and food produced with innovative technology,  as well as foodstuffs produced by using ionizing radiation, creates an information exchange facility for potential risks, proposes a foodstuff safety policy in accordance with WTO, follows all EU information related to foodstuff safety, undertakes measures for establishing international cooperation with institutions and organisations dealing with food and diet, FAO, WHO, WTO etc. The risk assessment and analysis unit undertakes activities of coordinated operation together with the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy related to foodstuff safety control, as well as development and design of regulations in the field of foodstuffs, prepares potential risk analyses of the data obtained from other competent inspection bodies, monitors risks, develops a crisis management plan, provides suggestions for promoting the process of risk assessment by regions.  The risk information unit undertakes measures for transparent consumer information and protection, establishes an early warning system and forwards information related to food hazards, and it presents a central data exchange body concerning crises. A Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed (RASFF) will be established in the same unit. The IT and public relations unit manages the database of all the data, keeps a registry of all foodstuff manufacturing and processing facilities, distribution centres and catering facilities.  It develops publications and other informative material intended for the public and related to the work of the Directorate, it develops and maintains a web page of the Directorate, and communicates with the public and provides information regarding key changes in the legislation, technique and operation in the Directorate. 
B. Legislative powers for food legislation 

1. Please specify the competent authorities (for legislation) and how legislation is (or will be) passed (primarily through parliamentary procedure or ministerial orders or decrees). Please describe the current status and the foreseen evolution with a precise timetable. 
The Assembly of Republic of Macedonia is the highest state institution for adopting laws. Each member of the Parliament, the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and at least 10.000 electors are entitled to propose adoption of a law (authorised law drafters). Carriers of law drafting procedure are the competent administrative authorities.  The Assembly shall adopt laws by majority of votes from the present members of Parliament, and at least with a third of the total number of MPs, unless a special majority is provided by the Constitution.  Following adoption, laws are published in the Official Gazette of RM. Secondary legislation (rule books, orders, decisions) in certain areas, for whose adoption there is legal basis in an appropriate lex generalis, are adopted on the part of the competent minister on the basis of relevant laws.  Such secondary legislation must previously be approved by the Legislation Secretariat that they are in conformity with the Constitution of Republic of Macedonia and other legal regulations. Following adoption secondary legislation is published in the Official Gazette of RM.  Legislation in force in the field of healthcare   Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02)  Secondary legislation to be adopted on the basis of the aforementioned law is in preparation, and the technical regulations on food, taken from the SFRY legal system are in force. The Macedonian Food Code shall consist of all food regulations to be adopted on the basis of the above law. In the strategic objective of the Food Directorate evaluation of Food legislation in the Republic of Macedonia is foreseen, as well as adoption of secondary legislation harmonised in accordance with the regulations of the European Union by December 2005. (01_III_D_ 2)  
2. Please explain how co-ordination is (or will be) ensured in terms of transposition, implementation and policy-making to ensure that the food chain is fully covered. Please describe the current status and the foreseen evolution with a precise timetable. 
The Law on Organisation and Operation of the State Administrative Bodies (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 58/00 and 44/02) provides an obligation of the state administration bodies carrying out inspection work, to cooperate in carrying out inspection work among each other, as well as with other state administration bodies, i.e. if a mistake is established in the course of the inspection supervision, they are obliged to notify the appropriate authority, i.e. the inspection service in order to undertake adequate measures within their authorisations. The Ministry of Health carries out the work related to foodstuff safety, while the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy– Veterinary Administration carries out the work related to food of animal origin, in accordance with the regulations on veterinary healthcare and the general requirements provided in the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02)stuff and Food Contact Products and Materials (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 54/00). The control of primary plant production from the viewpoint of foodstuff safety is provided in the answer to questions 07_VII_A_ _1 and 07_VII_A_ _3.The enforcement of the provisions of the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) from the viewpoint of foodstuff safety were carried out by the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate within the Ministry of Health, and starting from 1.01.2005 all competencies are undertaken by the Food Directorate. The Macedonian Foodstuff Code consists of all regulations on foodstuffs that are produced and put into circulation in the Republic of Macedonia. For the Macedonian Foodstuff Code the Minister of health established a Commission in October 2004 as an expert advisory body comprising representatives of the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Ministry of Economy and the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, upon the proposal of the competent ministers and eminent scientific and expert associates and representatives of the consumer association. The commission considers the issues regulated by the Macedonian Foodstuff Code as well as the methods of foodstuff analysis based on international scientific achievements, and provides recommendations in its field of work, based on the recommendations of international organisations harmonised with the requirements and conditions in the country. Eight committees consisting of experts in relevant fields work within the Directorate. On the basis of the data obtained by control or from the foodstuff risk warning system of another country in the region and wider, a special programme shall be developed by the experts for protection from the respective risk and for possibilities for removing it if present in our country. The committees are in charge of providing scientific opinions to the Directorate, each within its domain, and when public debates need to be organised. The science committee are in charge of the general coordination necessary to ensure consistency of the procedures for developing scientific opinions, as well as, in particular, with respect to the adoption of working procedures and working methods harmonisation.  In April 2004 the Government of the Republic of Macedonia adopted the Food and Diet Action Plan. The development of the priorities of the Food and Diet Action Plan of the country is based on the three pillars of the food and diet policy: diet strategy, safe food strategy and appropriate food supply strategy, as a priority in preventing food and diet related diseases, as well as on the commitments of the Republic of Macedonia as a member country of the World Health Organisation. The Food and Diet Action Plan is a result of a multi-sector approach accomplished through the work of the National Food and Diet Committee, which, though nominated by the Minister of health, includes representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Ministry of Economy, representatives of the highest education institutions, the consumer association etc. The following activities have been carried out in the area of transposition and implementation of the Codex Alimentarius standards into the national legislation:   A National Codex Office has been established as a central authority for relations with the Codex Alimentarius Commission, with other member countries, and, in the country, with the relevant Ministries, the food industry, the consumers, the sellers and the interested organisations and individuals.   A multi-sector National Food and Diet Committee and a Codex Alimentarius Committee has been established within the Ministry of Health, including representatives from the relevant ministries, the foodstuff industry, trade sector, science organisations, and consumer association. The further development of the foodstuff safety system is carried toward approximation and full harmonisation of foodstuff safety legislation with EU law. The national programme for approximation of legislation envisages the directions and timeframes in this area. 
C. Control activities and enforcement in the field of food legislation 

1. Please specify the competent authorities that are (or will be) in charge of control activities and enforcement and their respective responsibilities. Describe mechanisms of co-ordination when relevant. Please describe the current status and the foreseen evolution with a precise timetable. 
Competencies are clearly divided with the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02). Starting from 01.01.2005 the competencies of the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate are undertaken by the Food Directorate, which decides upon issues related to the supervision of the application of this regulation. Until 31.12.2004, the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate in Skopje coordinated the work of the sanitary and health inspectors with offices in the municipalities in the Republic of Macedonia, with a precisely designated geographic area of inspection. Furthermore, it processed monthly reports of the state sanitary and health inspectors from the regional units with regard to the foodstuff supervision carried out.  It was obliged to notify them of all sanitary unsafe foodstuff findings and of the need for their withdrawal from circulation. The work of the sanitary inspectors for border supervision is coordinated by the Ministry of Health where the office of the manager of the border supervision department of the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate is located, and all inspectors receive procedure instructions for each issue within the scope of activities and relevant notifications also delivered. The manager directly organises and focuses the work of the sanitary inspectors on the field. Feedback is delivered by regular monthly reports on the activities carried out. The Food Directorate took these activities from the State Sanitary and Health Inspectorate within its competence from 01.01.2005 with the adopted acts for organisational setup and systematisation of posts in the Food Directorate. The control of foodstuffs and food contact products and materials, are carried out at all stages of production and circulation by the Food Directorate and its food inspectors in accordance with the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) It covers raw materials, additives, subsidiary technological means and all other substances used in production. 1.  semi-finished products or ready-made foodstuffs, regardless where they are produced or for which market they are intended; 2.  products and materials that can come in contact with food; 3.  cleaning procedures and means and DDD; 4.  The condition and use of locations, buildings, rooms, offices, the plant surroundings, transport vehicles, machine devices and equipment at all stages of production and circulation; 5.  The food production technological processes; 6.  The packaging, marking, information and advertising, as well as presentation of foodstuffs and food contact products and materials; 7.  The HACCP in production or the foodstuff trader; 8.  The methods and ways of foodstuff preservation; 9.  The hygiene and health condition of the persons coming in direct or indirect contact with materials and food. The Law provides that inspection supervision shall be carried out regularly, and systematically according to an established plan, and in the event of doubt. Inspection supervision shall be carried out without prior notification. When carrying out inspection supervision the inspector shall, as a rule, select the stage or stages of each separate segment that they deem most suitable for carrying out supervision. Such supervision shall cover one or more of the following inspection procedures: 1.  General inspection of documents; 2.  Taking samples for laboratory analyses and examinations; 3.  Inspection of staff hygiene; 4.  Inspection and control of the HACCP verification system applied by the producer and trader and the results thereof; 5.  Inspection and control of the values registered by measuring instruments of the producer and trader, and control by measuring instruments of the inspector. The inspection supervision of foodstuff of animal origin is carried out by the Veterinary Directorate in accordance with the Food Lawstuff Safety and the regulations in the field of veterinary healthcare. A more detailed description is provided in the answer to question 07_VII_A_ _5. The Food Directorate plans the following future activities: a)  Development of an early warning system for the relevant hazards by regions. Establishment and implementation of an analysis sector for information on food safety policy. The key role of this department consists of enforcement and monitoring of the food safety policy and the development of a system for risk management, mapping potential threats and providing council in such situations. With regard to Regulation 882/2004/C, in the event of existence of several competent institutions (the Veterinary Directorate, the Plant Protection Directorate and the State Agricultural Inspectorate within the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management, as well as the State Environment Inspectorate within the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning) in order to implement efficient official control, efficient and expert coordination and cooperation between the departments will be established;  b)  A programme for establishing and maintaining communication with all involved partners, including consumers. Establishing and maintaining an information system on the needs of the Food Directorate. This system will enable the establishment of direct intranet connection with all regional food inspectors, including border inspection with the central directorate, as well as connection with authorized food laboratories, other inspectorates carrying out foodstuff control and the consumer associations; c)  Work on a commission for the Macedonian Foodstuff Code as an expert advisory body – on the basis of intra-sector cooperation with representatives from the competent ministries and eminent scientists and professionals; d)  Establishment and active work of committees consisting of experts in certain fields, which are to prepare expert opinions on implementing a system for risk analysis and implementation of precautionary principles and accountability of all who deal with food and cattle feed. In this way, thus adequate protection from potential risks to people’s health will be ensured; e)  Introduction of a registry of food production facilities in the Republic of Macedonia; f)  Issuing production approvals for foodstuffs with special nutrition use and foodstuffs produced with innovative technology, as well as foodstuffs produced by using ionising radiation; g)  Establishment and maintenance of a public relations office: regular communication with the public and providing information on certain fields with respect to key changes in politics, legal regulations, technology and institutions within the Directorate in accordance with government protocols, as well as communication with the public as regards complaints on the work of the Directorate or on the quality and safety of foodstuffs in production, transport and circulation. h)  A programme for taking samples which will precisely define the work of inspection services, the manner of taking samples, the number of samples depending on the risk degree , the type of the product, the capacity of the plant, and etc. in accordance with documented procedures and legal obligations under EU regulations. The controls carried out by the competent institution must be in accordance with documented procedures. Such procedures must contain information and instructions on staff actions in carrying out official control; i)  Developing an official control guide in accordance with EU procedures. The guide shall contain recommendations for the official control of:   the implementation of the HACCP principles   the management systems that foodstuff business operators must implement in order to accomplish the requirements provided for in the Food Law   Microbiological, physical and chemical food safety. j)  A programme for upgrading and training inspectors which will enable a completely new approach to foodstuff control in all segments of the food chain. k)  In 2005, in cooperation with the competent ministries, the activities for establishing an early warning system shall commence.  
D. Transposition and implementation of legislation 

1. Describe transposition/implementation plans (including enforcement) with precise and detailed timetables and dates with reference to the individual piece of EU legislation transposed/implemented in the area of food legislation. In case of only partial compatibility with EU legislation it should be made clear which part of the legislation is compatible and when the other part will be aligned and implemented. Please describe the current status and the foreseen evolution with a precise timetable. 
Harmonisation of national legislation on the safety of foodstuffs and food contact products with EU legislation shall be carried out with technical assistance of the European Agency for Reconstruction and Development. The specification of transposition of directives with a precise schedule and deadlines is provided in the National Programme for Approximation of National Legislation to EU Legislation adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia on 22.03.2004, as well as in the Action Plan for the European Partnership adopted in 2004. The Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) regulates the conditions for ensuring the safety of foodstuffs and food contact products and materials, production and circulation, the rights and obligations of natural and legal persons producing or circulating, with the general objective to protect human health, and consumers from misguidance and enabling free circulation on the internal and external market.  The Law is in function of creating normative and legal and other prerequisites for establishing an integrated and efficient system for control of foodstuffs and food contact products and materials, as well as in the function of the associative processes with EU - WTO.  The Law shall ensure confidence with the consumer and protection from misguidance through adequate and timely information on food safety, as well as efficient supervision of production, import and circulation, and protection of consumer health. The basis in the development of the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) was the Regulation 178/2002/C of the European Parliament and the Council laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority. The Law is normatively and technically designed to be internationally recognisable, with an approach for horisontal and vertical regulation (primary law and a large number of secondary legislation). National legislation in the Republic of Macedonia in the field of foodstuff safety is based on the following EU regulations:    Directive 2000/13/EC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs (OJ L 109, 06.05.2000).   Council Regulation (EEC) No 2082/92 on certificates of specific character for agricultural products and foodstuffs (OJ L 208, 24.07.1992)   Directive 2001/18/EC on the deliberate release into the environment of genetically modified organisms (OJ L 106 17.04.2001).   Council Directive 93/99/EEC on the subject of additional measures concerning the official control of foodstuffs (OJ L 290, 24.11.1993),    Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning novel foods and novel food ingredients (OJ L 043, 14.02.1997). All EU directives and regulations that are not incorporated in the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) are going to be incorporated in secondary legislation which is in the stage of preparation. The Implementation of EU legislation is answered in question 01_III_B_1 and 01_III_B_2
Secondary legislation in force: 1.  Rulebook on the conditions and the manner of examination of foodstuffs and consumer goods in the course of their production and on the way of keeping record of the examinations carried out (Official Gazette of SRM 20/76). 2.  Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out chemical and physical analysis of alcoholic beverages (Official Gazette of SFRY 70/87).  3.  Rulebook on the methods of physical and chemical analysis for controlling the quality of wheat, mill and pastries, pasta and fast frozen pastries (Official Gazette of SFRY 74/88). 4.  Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out chemical and physical analysis of milk and dairy products (Official Gazette of SFRY 32/83). 5.  Rulebook on the general minimum technical requirements for the rooms, devices and equipment for production, storage, keeping and circulation of foodstuffs and consumer goods (Official Gazette of SRM 17/79).  6.  Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out chemical and physical analysis for the control of the quality of fruit and vegetable products (Official Gazette of SFRY 29/83). 7.  Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out chemical and physical analysis of the quality of vinegar and diluted acetic acid (Official Gazette of SFRY 26/89). 8.  Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out chemical and physical analysis of protein products in the food industry (Official Gazette of SFRY 41/85). 9.  Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out chemical and physical analysis of cocoa grain, cocoa products, chocolate similar products, cream products, biscuits and biscuit related products. (Official Gazette of SFRY 41/87). 10. Rulebook on the conditions for microbiological safety which foodstuffs in circulation must meet (Official Gazette of SFRY 45/83, 43/89). 11. Rulebook on the conditions for sanitary safety of dieting foodstuffs that have to be placed in circulation (Official Gazette of SFRY 4/85, 70/86, 69/91). 12. Rulebook on the quantity of pesticides and other toxic material, hormones, antibiotics and micro-toxins which can be found in foodstuffs (Official Gazette of SFRY 59/83, 33/87, 79/87). 13. Rulebook on the conditions for sanitary safety of consumer goods that can be placed in circulation (Official Gazette of SFRY 26/83, 61/84, 56/86, 50/89, 18/91). 14. Rulebook on the conditions under which foodstuffs and consumer goods canned by radiation can be placed in circulation (Official Gazette of SFRY 68/54). 15. Rulebook on the conditions under which drinking water, foodstuffs and consumer goods containing radioactive material above certain  activity levels can be placed in circulation (Official Gazette of SFRY 23/86). 16. Rulebook on the safety of drinking water (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 5/04). 17. Rulebook on the quality of natural mineral water (Official Gazette of SRM No. 58/78). 18. Rulebook on the method of determining and maintaining safety zones around drinking water springs (Official Gazette of SRM No. 17/83).  19. Regulation for water classification (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/99). 20. Regulation for water categorisation (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 18/99). 21. Decision on designating healthcare and other organisations for carrying out and examining the sanitary safety of foodstuffs and consumer goods (Official Gazette of SRM 27/81, 39/82, 15/91). 22. Decision on healthcare and other organisations that are in compliance with the conditions for super analyses of foodstuffs and consumer goods (Official Gazette of SFRY 68/91). 23. Decision on designating the places where sanitary supervision of foodstuffs and consumer goods can be carried out (Official Gazette of SFRY 85/91). 24. Guidelines for the method of delivering reports on the implementation of the Law on the Health Safety of Foodstuffs and Products for General Use and of the regulations adopted on the basis of that Law (Official Gazette of the SFRY 45/84). 25. Guidelines on the method of sampling for carrying out analyses and super analyses of foodstuffs and consumer goods (Official Gazette of SFRY 60/78). 26. Decree for labelling attested special equipment of transport vehicles for international transport and perishable foodstuffs (Official Gazette of SFRY 24/78). 27. Rulebook on the methods of designating pH values and the quantity of toxic metals and non-metals in personal hygiene, facial and body care and beauty products, and on establishing the microbiological safety of such products (Official Gazette of SFRY 46/83). 28. Decree for compulsory product specification on machine and manual laundry detergents for textile goods (Official Gazette of SFRY 53/83). 29. Decree for compulsory adoption of product specification for: hair shampoos (Official Gazette of SFRY 29/85); toothpaste (Official Gazette of SFRY 29/85); Liquid detergents for manual dishwashing (Official Gazette of SFRY 67/85). 30. Decree for packaging and declaring: hair shampoos (Official Gazette of SFRY 34/90); washing powder for textile goods (Official Gazette of SFRY 53/83); liquid detergents for manual dishwashing (Official Gazette of SFRY 34/90); Toothpastes (Official Gazette of SFRY 29/85, 26/90). 31. Rulebooks on the quality of beverages: Rulebook on the quality of wine (Official Gazette 17/81 and 14/89). Rulebook on the quality of alcoholic beverages (Official Gazette 16/88 and 64/88). Rulebook on the quality of alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages, ice and vinegar (Official Gazette 31/63, 25/65, 45/71, 48/71, 25/75, 18/77, 13/78, 53/78, 2/82, 34/82, 52/83, 58/83, 16/88, 24/89  91/91). Rulebook on the quality of refreshing non-alcoholic beverages (Official Gazette 52/83 and 56/83). Rulebook on the quality of beer (Official Gazette 91/91). Rulebook on the quality of natural mineral water (Official Gazette 57/78). Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out chemical and physical analysis of alcoholic beverages (Official Gazette 70/87). 32. Rulebooks on the quality of coffee and coffee substitutes: Rulebook on the quality of coffee, coffee products and coffee substitutes (Official Gazette 55/89, 57/89 and 36/91). Rulebook on the quality of coffee and coffee substitutes, tea, spices, baking yeast, baking powder, pudding powder, dieting products and additives (Official Gazette 22/63, 2/64, 25/65, 50/66, 10/67, 54/67,15/78, 27/71, 8/75, 58/77, 60/77, 20/80, 41/80, 45/81, 52/86, 33/89 and 13/78). 33. Rulebooks on the quality of wheat and baking products: Rulebook on the quality of wheat, mill and baking products, pastries and fast frozen pastries (Official Gazette 53/83 and 57/88). Rulebook on the quality of baking yeast (Official Gazette 32/87). Rulebook on the quality of biscuits and biscuit related products (Official Gazette 68/78 and 63/79). Rulebook on the methods of physical and chemical analyses for controlling the quality of wheat, mill and baking products, pastries and fast frozen pastries (Official Gazette 74/88). Decree on the method of grinding wheat (Official Gazette 62/82 and 50/81). Rulebook on the methods of taking samples and carrying out chemical and physical analysis of cocoa beans, cocoa products, chocolate similar products, bonbon products, cream products, biscuits and biscuit related products (Official Gazette 41/87). 34. Rulebooks on the quality of food industry proteins: Rulebook on the quality of protein products and mixtures of protein products for food industry (Official Gazette 41/85). 35. Rulebooks on the quality of edible fats: Rulebook on the quality of fat and vegetable fat, margarine, mayonnaise, sugar and other saccharine, candy products, honey, cocoa products and products similar to chocolate (Official Gazette 19/63, 2/64, 27/71, 54/76, 59/77 and 13/78). Rulebook on the quality of edible and vegetable fats, and margarine, mayonnaise and similar products similar (Official Gazette 27/85 and 51/91). Rulebook on the quality of olive oil and mixed olive oil (Official Gazette 51/91). 36. Rulebooks on the quality of milk and dairy products: Rulebook on the quality of milk, dairy products, thick milk and pure cultures (Official Gazette 51/82 and 39/89). Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out chemical and physical analysis of milk and dairy products (Official Gazette 32/83). 37. Rulebooks on the quality of eggs and egg products: Rulebook on the quality of eggs and egg products (Official Gazette No. 55/89). Rulebook on the methods for examining the quality of eggs and egg products (Official Gazette 72/87). 38. Rulebook on the quality of honey and other bee products and on the methods of controlling the quality of honey and other bee products (Official Gazette 4/85). 39. Rulebook on the quality of foodstuffs additives (Official Gazette 39/89 and 22/90). 40. Rulebooks on the quality of cocoa and cocoa products: Rulebook on the quality of cocoa products, products similar to chocolate, cream products and bonbon products (Official Gazette 23/88, 63/88, 36/89 21/90). Rulebook on the methods of taking sampling extracts and carrying out chemical and physical analysis of cocoa beans, cocoa products. -  Rulebook on the methods of taking sampling extracts of food industry protein products (Official Gazette of SFRY 41/85). 41. Rulebooks on the quality of meat and meat products: Rulebook on the quality of slaughtered pigs and categorisation of pork meat (Official Gazette 2/85, 12/85 and 24/86). Rulebook on the quality of poultry meat (Official Gazette 1/81 and 15/88). Rulebook on the quality of meat from cattle for slaughter, poultry and wildlife (Official Gazette 34/74 26/75 and 13/78). Rulebook on the quality of meat products (Official Gazette 29/74, 41/80 and 13/78). Rulebook on the quality of poultry meat products (Official Gazette 55/91). 42. Rulebook on the quality of fish, shrimp, shellfish, sea urchins, frogs, tortoises, snails and their products (Official Gazette 65/79 and 48/84).  43. Rulebook on the quality of spices, spice extracts and spice mixtures (Official Gazette 4/85 and 84/87). 44. Rulebooks on the quality of fruit, vegetables and mushrooms: Rulebook on the quality of fruit, vegetables and mushrooms (Official Gazette 29/79 and 53/87). Rulebook on the quality of fruit, vegetable and mushroom products and pectin preparations (Official Gazette 1/79, 20/82, 39/89 and 74/90). Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out chemical and physical analysis for the control of the quality of fruit and vegetable products (Official Gazette of SFRY 29/83).  Rulebook on the quality of edible mushrooms and products from edible mushrooms (Official Gazette 46/91 and 64/91). 45. Rulebooks on the quality of acetic acid and diluted acetic acid: Rulebook on the quality of vinegar and diluted acetic acid (Official Gazette 24/89). Rulebook on the methods of sampling and chemical and physical analysis for control of the quality of vinegar and diluted acetic acid (Official Gazette 26/89). 46. Rulebook on the quality of soups, soup stock, sauce concentrate and food additions (Official Gazette 5/82 and 58/85). 47. Rulebooks on the quality of cattle feed: Rulebook on the quality of cattle feed (Official Gazette 15/89 and 54/90). Rulebook on the methods of sampling and carrying out physical, chemical and microbiological analysis of cattle feed (Official Gazette 15/87). 
2. Indicate if a table of correspondence between your legislation and EU legislation is already available. Please describe the current status and the foreseen evolution with a precise timetable. 
No tables of correspondence for the applicable legislation in this field, in the Republic of Macedonia have been drafted. The current situation is detailed in questions 01_III_C_1 and 01_III_D_1 of this Chapter. Tables of correspondence shall be prepared in the course of drafting legal acts in this field, in accordance with the scheduled dynamics in the National Programme for Approximation of Legislation with EU Legislation. The above shall also be delivered to the European Commission.   
Rulebook on food contact materials and products Adoption deadline - 2005


Council Directive 89/109/EEC of 1988 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to materials and articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs. 
Council Directive 82/711/EEC of 1982 laying down the basic rules necessary for testing migration of the constituents of plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs. 
Directive 93/8/EEC of 1993 amending Directive 82/711/EEC. 

Directive 85/572/EEC of 1985 laying down the list of stimulants to be used for testing migration of constituents of plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs. 
Directive 90/128/EEC of 1990 relating to plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs. 

Directive 92/39/EEC of 1992 amending Directive 90/128/EEC.    

Directive 93/9/EEC of 1993 amending Directive 90/128/EEC. 

Directive 93/10/EEC of 1993 relating to materials and articles made of regenerated cellulose film intended to come into contact with foodstuffs. 
Directive 93/111/EEC of 1993 amending Directive 93/10/EEC. 10.
Directive 84/500/EEC of 1984 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to ceramic articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs. 11.
Directive 78/142/EEC of 1978 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to materials and articles which contain vinyl chloride monomer and are intended to come into contact with foodstuffs. 12.
Directive 2002/72/EC of 6 August 2002 relating to plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs. 13.
Corrigendum to Directive 2002/72/EC of 6 August 2002 relating to plastic materials and articles intended to come into contact with foodstuffs. 
RULEBOOK ON LABELLING PRE-PACKAGED FOODSTUFFS     Adoption deadline - 2005

Directive 2000/13/EC on the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs. 

Directive 94/54/EC concerning the compulsory indication on the labelling of certain foodstuffs of particulars other than those provided for in Council Directive 79/112/EEC. 
Regulation (EEC) No 2092/91 on organic production of agricultural products and indications referring thereto on agricultural products and foodstuffs. 
Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003 on genetically modified food and feed. 

Directive 94/35/EC on sweeteners for use in foodstuffs. 

Directive 2002/67/EC on the labelling of foodstuffs containing quinine, and of foodstuffs containing caffeine. 

Directive 89/396/EEC on indications or marks identifying the lot to which a foodstuff belongs. 

Directive 87/250/EEC on the indication of alcoholic strength by volume in the labelling of alcoholic beverages for sale to the ultimate consumer. 
Directive 90/496/EEC nutrition labelling for foodstuffs.   
RULEBOOK ON ADDITIVES IN FOODSTUFFS Adoption deadline - 2005

Directive 94/35/EC on sweeteners for use in foodstuffs.    

Directive 94/36/EC on colours for use in foodstuffs. 

Directive No 95/2/EC on food additives other than colours and sweeteners. 

Directive 88/388/EEC on flavourings for use in foodstuffs.  

Directive 88/344/EEC on extraction solvents used in the production of foodstuffs. 

Directive 95/45/EC laying down specific purity criteria concerning colours for use in foodstuffs 

Directive 95/31/EC laying down specific criteria of purity concerning sweeteners for use in foodstuffs. 
Directive 2004/46/EC amending Directive 95/31/EC as regards E 955 sucralose and E 962 salt of aspartame-acesulfame. Directive 96/77/EC laying down specific purity criteria on food additives other than colours and sweeteners. 10.Directive 78/663/EEC laying down specific criteria of purity for emulsifiers, stabilizers, thickeners and gelling agents for use in foodstuffs. 11.
Directive 82/504/EEC amending Directive 78/663/EEC laying down specific criteria of purity for emulsifiers, stabilizers, thickeners and gelling agents for use in foodstuffs. 
RULEBOOK ON THE MAXIMUM ALLOWED LEVELS OF CONTAMINANTS IN FOODSTUFFS Adoption deadline - 2005 

Directive 86/362/EEC on the fixing of maximum levels for pesticide residues in and on cereals 

Directive 76/895/EEC relating to the fixing of maximum levels for pesticide residues in and on fruit and vegetables 

Directive 90/642/EEC on the fixing of maximum levels for pesticide residues in and on certain products of plant origin, including fruit and vegetables. 
Directive 86/363/EEC on the fixing of maximum levels for pesticide residues in and on foodstuffs of animal origin.        

Regulation (EC) No 466/2001 setting maximum levels for certain contaminants in foodstuffs. 

Regulation (EC) No 2375/2001 amending Commission Regulation (EC) No 466/2001  

Regulation (EC) No 472/2002 amending Regulation (EC) No 466/2001. 

Regulation (EC) No 563/2002 amending Regulation (EC) No 466/2001. 

Regulation (EC) No 1425/2003 amending Regulation (EC) No 466/2001. 10.
Regulation (EC) No 2174/2003 amending Regulation (EC) No 466/2001. 11.
Regulation (EC) No 242/2004 amending Regulation (EC) No 466/2001. 12.
Regulation (EEC) No 2377/90 laying down a Community procedure for the establishment of maximum residue limits of veterinary medicinal products in foodstuffs of animal origin. 13.
Directive 96/22/EC concerning the prohibition on the use in stock farming of certain substances having a hormonal or thyrostatic action and of ß-agonists. 
RULEBOOK ON THE MICROBIOLOGICAL SAFETY OF FOODSTUFFS Adoption deadline - 2005 

Directive 94/65/EC laying down the requirements for the production and placing on the market of minced meat and meat preparations. 
Directive 92/46/EEC laying down the health rules for the production and placing on the market of raw milk, heat-treated milk and milk-based products. 
Directive 91/492/EEC laying down the health conditions for the production and the placing on the market of live bivalve molluscs. 
Directive 89/437/EEC on hygiene and health problems affecting the production and the placing on the market of egg products. 
Directive 80/777/EEC on the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters. 
93/51/EEC: Commission Decision on the microbiological criteria applicable to the production of cooked crustaceans and molluscan shellfish. 7. 2001/471/EC: Commission Decision on health problems affecting the production and placing on the market of fresh poultry meat.
RULEBOOK ON THE TYPES OF FOODstuffs INTENDED FOR PARTICULAR NUTRITIONAL USES Adoption deadline - 2005 

Council Directive 89/398/EEC of 3 May 1989 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses 
Directive 96/84/EC of The European Parliament and of the Council of 19 December 1996 amending Directive 89/398/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses 
Directive 1999/41/EC of The European Parliament and of the Council  of 7 June 1999  amending Directive 89/398/EEC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses 
Commission Directive 2001/15/EC  of 15 February 2001 on substances that may be added for specific nutritional purposes in foodstuffs for particular nutritional uses 
Commission Directive 1999/21/EC of 25 march 1999 on dietary foodstuffs for special medical purposes 

Directive 2002/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 June 2002 on the approximation of the Laws of the member States relating to food supplements 
RULEBOOK ON THE COMPOSITION AND LABELLING OF DIETARY FOODSTUFFS FOR SPECIAL MEDICAL PURPOSES Adoption deadline - 2005 

Council Directive 89/398/EEC of 3 May 1989 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses 
Commission Directive 1999/21 of 25 March 1999 on dietary foods for special medical purposes [Official Journal L 91, 07.04.1999] 
RULEBOOK ON THE REQUIREMENTS FOR CEREAL-BASED FOODSTUFFS AND BABY FOODSTUFFS FOR INFANTS AND YOUNG CHILDREN Adoption deadline - 2005 

Commission Directive 96/5/EC of 16 February 1996 on processed cereal-based foodstuffs and baby foodstuffs for infants and young children [Official Journal L 49 of 28.02.1996]. 
Commission Directive 98/36/EC of 2 June 1998 amending     Directive 96/5/EC on processed cereal-based foodstuffs and baby foodstuffs for infants and young children [Official Journal L167, 12/6/1998 P. 0023-0024].  
Commission Directive 1999/39/EC oF 6 May 1999 [Official Journal L124 of 18.05.1999]. 
RULEBOOK ON THE COMPOSITION AND LABELLING OF MILK-BASED FOODSTUFFS FOR INFANTS – INFANT FORMULA Adoption deadline - 2005 

Council Directive 89/398/EEC of 3 May 1989 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses 
Commission Directive of 14 May 1991 on infant formulae and follow-on formulae (91/321/EEC)  

Commission Directive 96/4/EC of 16 February 1996 amending Directive 91/321/EEC on infant formulae and follow-on formulae (Text with EEA relevance) 
Commission Directive 1999/50/EC  of 25 May 1999 amending Directive 91/321/EEC on infant formulae and follow-on formulae (Text with EEA relevance) 
Commission Directive 2003/14/EC  of 10 February 2003 amending Directive 91/321/EEC on infant formulae and follow-on formulae 

Commission Directive 2003/5/EC  of 10 January 2003 amending Council Directive 91/414/EEC to include deltamethrin as active substance 
Commission Regulation (EC) No 466/2001 of 8 March 2001 setting maximum levels for certain contaminants in foodstuffs [Official Journal L 77 of 16.03.2001 
RULEBOOK ON THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE COMPOSITION, FEATURES AND LABELLING OF FOOD SUPPLEMENTS Adoption deadline - 2005 

DIRECTIVE 2002/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 June 2002 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to food supplements [Official Journal L183 of 12.07.2002]. 
RULEBOOK ON THE HYGIENE OF FOODSTUFFS Adoption deadline - 2005 

Regulation (EC) no 852/2004 of the European Parliament 
And of the council of 29 April 2004 on the hygiene of foodstuffs 
Regulation (EC) no 853/2004 of the European Parliament 
And of the Council of 29 April 2004 laying down specific hygiene rules for on the hygiene of foodstuffs 
Directive 93/43/EEC of  foodstuff hygiene 

Regulation EC 178/2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the food safety authority and laying down procedures  in matters of food safety 

Regulation (EC) No. 882/2004  of the European Parliament and of the Council on official controls performed to ensure the verification of compliance with feed and food law, animal health and animal welfare rules 
RULEBOOK ON THE RADIOACTIVE CONTAMINATION OF FOODSTUFFS Adoption deadline - 2005 EU Measures: 

Council Directive 3954/87  of 22 December 1987 laying down maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs of feedstuffs following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency. 
Council Regulation 2218/89 of 18 July 1989 amending Regulation 3954/87 laying down maximum permitted levels of radioactive contamination of foodstuffs of feedstuffs following a nuclear accident or any other case of radiological emergency. 
Council Regulation 737/90  of 22 March 1990 on the conditions governing imports of agricultural products originating in third countries following the accident  at the Chernobyl nuclear power-station 
Council Regulation 686/95 of  28 March 1995 extending Regulation EEC No. 737/90 on the conditions governing imports of agricultural products originating in third countries following the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power-station 
Council Regulation No. 616/200 of 20 March 2000 amending  Regulation EEC No 737/90 on the conditions governing imports of agricultural products originating in third countries following the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power station 
Council Regulation (EEC) No 737/90 of 01 April 1990 on the conditions governing imports of agricultural products originating in third countries following the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power station 
Preparation of administration and operators: 

1. Please identify the systems of pre-market approval of foodstuffs which are not in conformity with EU law and indicate whether and when a revision of these is foreseen in order to align them with the EU food law principles (notably regarding operators’ prime responsibility for food safety). Please describe the current status and the foreseen evolution with a precise timetable. 
The Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) regulates the conditions for ensuring the safety of foodstuffs and food contact products and materials, production and circulation, the rights and obligations of natural and legal persons producing or circulating, with the general objective to protect human health, and consumers from misguidance and enabling free circulation on the internal and external market.  Relevant EU directives and regulations that are not incorporated in the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) are going to be incorporated in secondary legislation which is in a stage of preparation. The current status and the foreseen evolution of the National Legislation is answered in questions 01_III_B_1 and 01_III_B_2Starting form 01.01.2005 the Food Directorate took over the control, notably regarding operators’ prime responsibility for food safety, control of foodstuffs and food contact products and materials. In the legislation of the Republic of Macedonia no system for issuing pre-market approvals in the field of food (from the point of view of the sanitary safety of food) is foreseen. 
2. As guidance for the information which should be provided, take as an example the area of Control/hygiene rules for food as described below: a) Training of the various control officials on inspection and sampling in general and on HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points): state of advancement and future plans; b) HACCP implementation by food operators: state of advancement and future plans; c) laboratories used in hygiene control and foodstuff analysis (chemical, microbiology, GMOs, etc): present or planned activities (with time-table) to comply with EU systems; time-table of accreditation according to EU law with name of accreditation body; methods of sampling and analysis (in general; for contaminants; for food contact materials, etc.); d) procedures for registration and authorisation (if any) or system of listing food establishments: state of advancement and future plans; e) present (and planned) resources (personnel, budget and inspection equipment); f) present (and planned) frequency of controls; planning of inspection activities; g) present (and planned) procedures for encouraging the development of guides of good hygiene practice and for assessing these guides; h) evaluation of the control services (existing or planned audit system); i) management of food complaints, food poisoning cases, enforcement, legal action, appeals; j) control of imported food (existing and planned system). Please describe the current status and the foreseen evolution with a precise timetable. 
a)  Within the signed two-year agreement for cooperation of WHO and the Ministry of Health of the Republic of Macedonia, the first WHO seminar on training HACCP instructors (analysis of hazardousness and critical point control) was successfully held in the Republic Healthcare Bureau from 11 to 15 November 2002 in Skopje, attended by 14 inspectors (8 sanitary inspectors, 2 veterinary and agricultural inspectors, respectively), who completed the provided trainer training as a contribution to enhancing the capacities of the Ministries dealing with foodstuff safety. The Minister of Health by adopting special regulations based on the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) and Food Contact Products and Materials shall prescribe and stipulate all requirements for individual entities working with foodstuffs and they are going to be obliged to implement the HACCP system. The preparation and adoption of the Rulebook on general foodstuff safety requirements (foodstuff hygiene section) is foreseen to be harmonised with the EU Directive 93/43 by the end of 2005. b) In accordance with the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02), foodstuff producers and traders are obliged to apply in the production and circulation of foodstuffs system for risk assessment of critical control points (HACCP) covering: 1.  Analysis of potential foodstuff contamination risks, 2.  Identification of stages in the technological process where opportunities exist for the occurrence of potential risks and adoption of a decision as to which of the stages can be expected to be a critical point, 3.  Establishment and application of procedures for monitoring and controlling established critical point hazards, and 4.  Periodical inspections of the activities under items 1-3 as regards their effectiveness or renewal in the event of changes in the foodstuff production and circulation process, as well as keeping written records of the periodical inspections. With the start of work of the Food Directorate (01.01.2005), it is planned to develop an implementation plan for the entire food industry, distribution and circulation with timeframes in accordance with the requirements met by the facilities, and the degree of risk. Food inspectors will be trained to provide adequate advice and develop special implementation timeframes for each facility respectively, in accordance with the general timeframe. Currently, there is a small number of production facilities implementing the HACCP system, but a large number are at the implementation stage.  The GTZ project for establishing a HACCP info centre with a website (http://www.haccpinfo.org.mk) was successfully accomplished in 2003. Since 2002 GTZ have been working on a project for implementation of the HACCP system in ten production facilities in the Republic of Macedonia with external verification.  Several workshops have been held within the Ministry of Economy on the requirements for implementing the HACCP system, as well as for the system itself. Several international projects (GTZ, USAID, SIDA, SEED, the FAO office in the Republic of Macedonia etc.) are engaged in the education of primary producers and processors for the implementation of the systems for good agricultural practices, good production practices and the HACCP system, as well as in controller education. 
c)  The Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) provides for examination and analyses of foodstuff and food contact items to be carried out by accredited laboratories, where laboratory accreditation is carried out in accordance with the regulations on accreditation. The responsible institution for the implementation of laboratory accreditation is the Accreditation Institute of the Republic of Macedonia.  There is currently no accredited laboratory in the Republic of Macedonia. Pending accreditation of one, the examination and analysis of foodstuff and food contact products and materials shall be carried out by the existing laboratories authorised by the Minister of Health and the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy. Laboratories authorised by the Ministry of Health to carry out analysis and super analysis of foodstuffs and consumer goods of import and domestic production are the Republic Healthcare Bureau, Skopje, and the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Skopje, examining sanitary safety with all parameters. The other ten laboratories of regional healthcare institutes carry out analysis of foodstuff of domestic production and in domestic circulation. The food laboratories in the Republic Healthcare Bureau and the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine have the most sophisticated examination equipment and they employ highly expert staff with a doctrinal approach to laboratory examinations for quick and accurate analysis with established methodology.  The food laboratories (microbiological, toxicological and radiological) of the Republic Healthcare Bureau are at the stage of applying for accreditation.  The remaining ten food laboratories of healthcare institutes (microbiological and for examination of physical and chemical parameters) shall also start the accreditation process. State monitoring is defined with the Programme for Preventive Healthcare, adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia upon the proposal of the Minister of health each year and it is published in the Official Gazette of RM (sanitary and hygiene section) where the programmes to be carried out by the ten regional institutes and the Republic Healthcare Bureau as regards monitoring food contaminants, drinking water in rural areas, radiological contamination of foodstuffs and control of consumer goods, are defined. These programmes are funded from the budget of the Republic of Macedonia.  For example, the food laboratories within the Republic Healthcare Bureau have the most sophisticated examination equipment and work with highly expert staff who regularly attend seminars in EU countries.  They carry out:   laboratory establishment of the hygiene quality of the food product;   laboratory establishment of contaminants in foodstuffs by detection of pesticides, heavy metals, mycotoxins, and additives;   laboratory identification of the presence of organic and inorganic chemical contaminants in a food product;   laboratory establishment of contaminants in drinking water, mineral water, in accordance with the criteria and regulations in force in the Republic;    establishing contaminants in soil samples;   expert participation in the development of regulations and standards on referent healthcare and environmental laboratory procedures, norms and working conditions;   training and education of analytics staff in the field of sanitary chemistry and toxicology. As regards the methods of analysis of foodstuff and food contact items, they are not specifically regulated in Macedonian legislation. Where possible, internationally acknowledged and referent methods are used, as well as alternative methods described in collections (AOAC, CAC, Food chemical codex etc.). In certain cases, unofficial empirical methods are used. 
Heavy metals (in all foodstuffs) 
Quantitative establishment of arsenic and selenium by applying graphite atomic absorption spectrometry; Quantitative establishment of metals by flame atomic absorption spectrometry with previous dissolution of the sample in a HCl / HNO3 concentrate; Quantitative establishment of heavy metals with the method of atomic absorption spectrometry following microwave mineralization. 
Analysis of pesticide residues 
Fruit, vegetables, juice and tomatoes 
Gas chromatographic establishment of pesticides containing chlorine and phosphorus following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns;  Gas chromatographic establishment of pesticides containing phosphorus and sulphur following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns;  Gas chromatographic establishment of pesticides containing phosphorus, sulphur and nitrogen following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns; Gas chromatographic establishment of pesticides containing chlorine, nitrogen, phosphorus and sulphur following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns Gas chromatographic establishment of pyrethrines following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns 
Wheat and wheat products, spices, pulverised fruit, tea 
Gas chromatographic establishment of pesticides containing chlorine and phosphorus following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns Gas chromatographic establishment of pesticides containing phosphorus and sulphur following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns Gas chromatographic establishment of pesticides containing phosphorus, sulphur and nitrogen following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns Gas chromatographic establishment of pesticides containing chlorine, nitrogen, phosphorus and sulphur following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns Gas chromatographic establishment of pyrethrines following clean-up by gel permeation chromatography and chromatography with mini-silica gel columns 
Fat and edible fat, essence oils 

Gas chromatographic establishment of organ chlorine pesticides with previous dissolution of fats in petrol ether (40-80) or in n-hexane and participation of acetone/petrol ether 40-80 (n-hexane) 
Meat, cheese, fish 
Gas chromatographic establishment of organ chlorine pesticides with previous dissolution of fats in petrol ether (40-80) or in n-hexane and participation of acetone/petrol ether 40-80 (n-hexane) Fat extraction by petrol ether 40-80 (n-hexane) with a Soxhlet apparatus Fats and edible fats, wheat and rye flakes, oats, walnuts, hazelnuts, peanuts, and oilseeds Gas chromatographic establishment of organ chlorine pesticides with previous dissolution of fats in petrol ether (40-80) or in n-hexane and participation of acetone/petrol ether 40-80 (n-hexane) Fat extraction by petrol ether 40-80 (n-hexane) with a Soxhlet apparatus 
Analysis of mycotoxins 
Walnuts, hazelnuts, peanuts, pistachios, almonds, cereals, tea, spices 
Establishing aflatoxins:    B1  B2  G1  G2 by thin-layer chromatography (TLC). 
Sample extraction is carried out by chloroform and extract purification is done with a florisil column 
Establishing aflatoxins:   B1  B2  G1  G2 with high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC), with a fluorescent detector (FL). Sample extraction is carried out by chloroform and extract purification is done with a florisil column 
Proteins (in all foodstuffs) 
Establishing protein content with the Kjeldahl method with Kjeltec Auto 1030 Analyzer – micro procedure Milk, dairy products 
     Establishing milk volume mass by lactodensimeter      Establishing acidity according to Soxhlet-Henkel with a titration, colorimetric method with       0.1 M NaOh modification according to Morres      Establishing fat with the Gerber acido-butyrometric method      Establishing dry matter with the gravimetric method of analytic scales      Proving milk pasteurisation with the Andersen and Petersen method with phosphate test      Proving crude impurity in milk with the filter method      Establishing the freezing point of milk with the Beckman thermometer       Establishing milk serum refraction reading on a refractometer      Establishing lactose and sucrose by reduction of the Fehling solution with tritation      Establishing water in milk with the gravimetric method of analytic scales      Testing solubility by reconstructing powder milk and separating dry matter      Establishing fat with a cream butyrometer according to the Gerber method      Establishing cheese fat with a cheese butyrometer according to the Gerber method      Establishing water according to the drying method      Establishing NaCl with the Volhard tritation method      Establishing water in butter according to the drying method      Establishing water in butter according to the evaporation method      Establishing fat with a butter butyrometer according to the Gerber method      Establishing free carbon acid (CO) with the tritation method with 0.1 M NaOH      Establishing alcohol with the gravimetric method with a pycnometer Sanitary safety is established for:   vessels and kitchen utensils  Foodstuffs packaging  toys  tobacco products (Establishing sanitary safety of consumer goods according to legal and expert regulations as regards heavy metals (Pb, Cd, Co, Cr, As, Hg, Se, Ni), and organic and inorganic compounds (polycyclic aromatic carbohydrates, naphtylamin, benzidine, acrylo-nitril, vinyl chloride, phenols, cresols, identification of all plastic material); 
EQUIPMENT 
  gas chromatograph with a fat spectrometer PERKIN ELMER, DETECTOR Jon Trap 800;   gas chromatograph with the necessary detectors (FID, ECD,NPP) VARIAN M-3700;   gas chromatograph HEWLET PACKARD with HEAD SPACE HS - 40;   liquid chromatograph PERKIN ELMER 235 C - detector - HPLC; ААС - furnace and cooling system PERKIN ELMER M 3110/MHS 10; ААС – furnace, cooling system and graphite cuvette - PERKIN ELMER - AA 4100/HGA 700;   thin-layer chromatography system – GAMAG;   infrared spectrometer IR-PERKIN ELMER - PARAGON 1000;   spectrophotometer UV-VIS PE - LAMBDA-12 with a continuous-flow cuvette;   other accessory equipment.   Establishing sanitary safety of consumer goods according to legal and expert regulations as regards heavy metals (Pb, Cd, Co, Cr, As, Hg, Se, Ni), and organic and inorganic compounds (polycyclic aromatic carbohydrates, naphtylamin, benzidine, acrylo-nitril, vinyl chloride, phenols, cresols, identification of all plastic material;   training and education of analytics staff in the field of sanitary chemistry and toxicology. Sanitary safety is established for:   vessels and kitchen utensils  Foodstuffs packaging  toys  tobacco products 
EQUIPMENT 
The unit applies contemporary diagnostics methods in its work and is equipped with the necessary apparatus and laboratory material for research in this field, as follows: ААС – with a furnace method PERKIN ELMER M 372; ААС – furnace, cooling system and graphite cuvette - PERKIN ELMER M 3110/MHS 10;   other laboratory equipment supplies. The Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02) mentions that foodstuffs containing or consisting of genetically modified organisms, produced from genetically modified organisms shall be referred to as foodstuffs produced by innovative technology which is still not accessible for public use. Article 6 clearly defines that vegetable foodstuffs and vegetable food products in whose seed material there has been genetic intervention shall be considered unsafe foodstuffs and the production and circulation of unsafe foodstuffs is prohibited. There are currently no mechanisms in the Republic of Macedonia for the control of GMO in foodstuffs. There is no GMO monitoring facility in the Republic of Macedonia. In the event of suspicion of such foodstuffs, the Ministry of Health forwards examination samples to accredited laboratories in EU countries.  In the 2005 framework plan, it is provided to purchase a Real time PCR for Republic Healthcare Bureau and by completing the existing laboratory apparatus to commence the process of establishing a GMO laboratory in the Republic of Macedonia. The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy is responsible for the import, control and use of products of vegetable origin containing GMO and intended for human and animal consumption. The Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning shall be responsible in future for assessing the risk and the influence of GMO on the environment. In future, the Ministry of Health shall manage the assessment of the risk and the influence of GMO on the human population. These three ministries need to be well-prepared to develop mutual cooperation on the practical implementation of legislation in future, thus regulating biotechnology and bio-safety.  The provisions of the Carthage Protocol on bio-safety (when it is ratified) together with the provisions of the appropriate EU directives will be adequately integrated in the new law relating to genetically modified organisms. The new law will regulate issues relating to the import, marketing, use in production of genetically modified organisms, deliberate release in the environment and risk management. This law is to cover, in addition to genetically modified micro organisms, genetic transformation in plants, animals and humans. This is the only way in which the new law will present an instrument for ensuring the safe development of contemporary biotechnology in Macedonia.   In the Republic of Macedonia the project National Framework for Biological Safety of UNEP-GEF is currently underway and it is part of the global UNEP-GEP project, whose objective is to help the countries (currently 119 are involved) in the implementation of the Carthage Protocol on bio-safety through the development and implementation of the National Framework for Bio-safety. 
d)  The Minister of Health, in accordance with the Law on Safety of Foodstuffs and Products and Materials in Contact with Foodstuffs (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02), will adopt a special regulation regulating the conditions for carrying out operations for the facilities for the production and circulation of food, which will be in accordance with EU standards. This regulation is at the preparation stage and its adoption is expected in 2005/2006. e) The total number of food inspectors in the Food Directorate, Inspection supervision sector is 58, organised on a regional level. The inspection is funded from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia, while part of the funds are provided from providing services at the request of the client.  The provision of funds for the equipment of the inspection service will take place gradually, in accordance with the funds allocated by the 2005 Budget Programme. The funds projected do not meet entirely the needs for carrying out inspection supervision pursuant to legal regulation and this shall require procuring additional funds. Organisation chart for inspection supervision within the Food Directorate 29/e:  