V. PUBLIC PROCUREMENT 
A. State of legislation in the field of public procurement 

1. Does existing legislation cover all types of contracts? If exclusions are foreseen, on which grounds are they established? 
The regulation in the field of public procurement in the Republic of Macedonia has commenced with the adoption of the Law on Public Procurement by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia in June 1998 (“Official Gazette of RM” 26/98). The same has been amended on two occasions: in January 2002 (“Official Gazette of RM” 2/2002) and in April 2003 (“Official Gazette of RM” 24/2003). The experience from the implementation of the Law on Public Procurement, as well as the need to further align our legislation with that of the EU, have imposed the need for a more profound amendment of this field and adoption of a new law based on European principles and standards.  The new Law on Public Procurement has been adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia on 26 March 2004 (“Official Gazette of RM” 19/2004) and the same entered into force on 7 April 2004. The Law on Public Procurement regulates the manner and procedure for carrying out procurement in the Republic of Macedonia and, at the same time, established a legal framework for the conduct of suppliers and bidders in public procurement.  Public procurement, in accordance with Article 2 paragraph 1 item 2 from the Law on Public Procurement, is a compilation of activities carried out by the supplier and related to the acquisition of goods, obtaining services or carrying out work. Article 3, 4 and 5 from the Law regulate the exception to the application of the Law on Public Procurement. In accordance with Article 3 of the Law, the provisions of the Law on Public Procurement shall not apply to public procurement for the defence and security of the country; they are declared a state secret and relate to the purchase of weapons, military equipment and special operations technology, in accordance with law.  The provisions of the Law on Public Procurement, pursuant to Article 4, do not relate to public procurement for which funds from international organisations (donors and creditors) have been provided, if they have prescribed special terms of procurement for the same. In accordance with Article 5 from the Law, the provisions of the Law on Public Procurement shall also not apply to procurement for:   purchasing or renting land, buildings or other real property or rights arising thereof, unless their purchase or rent requires ensuring funds (credits or loans);   financial services for issuing, disposing, purchase or transfer of securities or other financial instruments, broker services and services of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia;   purchase, development, production or co-production of programme materials by radio or television stations and for the time slots for radio and television broadcasting;   services for speech telephony, telex, radiotelephony, paging and satellite services;   employment mediation services;   research and development services, except when the supplier uses the research to commercial ends; and   granting a concession. 2. Are all tenders above a certain threshold published before the launching of the procedure? What are the types of information that your legislation requires to be included in notices of invitation to tender? 
In accordance with the Law on Public Procurement, if the value of the procurement exceeds 3,000 euros in denar equivalent value, the purchaser is obliged to carry out the same by applying one of the following kinds of procedures: open invitation, limited invitation, project development competition or limited invitation for consulting services. The procurement invitation, in accordance with Article 30 paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Procurement, by open invitation, limited invitation, project development competition and limited invitation for consulting services, must compulsorily be published by the purchaser in the Official Gazette of RM.  In accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article, the invitation may be published on the public procurement website of the Public Procurement Bureau without any compensation, within three days following the delivery of the electronic version.  The open invitation announcement, in accordance with Article 57 of the Law, compulsorily contains:    the name, address and head office of the purchaser, telephone and fax numbers;    the number of the invitation;    description of the subject and quantity of procurement;   place of delivery, performance of work or provision of services;    a statement of the possibility to divide the procurement into parts, depending on the type of goods, equipment and service;   the place and conditions for issuing bidding documentation, the amount and mode of payment of the sum to be paid to obtain the documentation;    the closing date for receiving bids and the address to which bids are sent;   the persons authorised to take part in opening the bids;   the date, hour and place of opening the bids;   the requirements for submitting a contract execution guarantee;   evidence and documentation that the bidder needs to prove economic and financial, and technical capacity;   the time of validity of the bid;   the criteria for selecting a best bid, i.e. for awarding the contract;   description of the processing of the bid and the form and contents of the bid;   other information pertaining to the subject of procurement. The limited invitation announcement, in accordance with Article 61 of the Law, compulsorily contains:    the name, address and head office of the purchaser, telephone and fax numbers;    the number of the invitation;    the intention of the purchaser to carry out a certain type of procurement;   evidence and documentation that the bidder needs to prove economic and financial, and technical capacity;   the closing date for receiving bids and the address to which bids are to be sent;   the minimum criteria on the basis of which the purchase shall assess the capacity to carry out the supply; and   the deadline for adopting a decision for qualification of the candidates who applied. 
3. Please provide a general description of your existing procurement procedures. Are procuring entities allowed to proceed to negotiations? If so, under what conditions? 
The purchaser, in accordance with Article 29 of the Law on Public Procurement, may conduct  public procurement by applying one of the following procedures:  open invitation;   limited invitation;    negotiation procedure;    project development competition; and   limited invitation for consulting services.   The open invitation is a procurement procedure where all interested subjects may make a bid in accordance with the previously defined requirements by the purchaser provided in the tender documentation. The purchaser conducts a limited invitation procedure when on the basis of a limited invitation for the financial and technical capacities of the candidates applied and on the basis of established criteria they select a certain number of candidates who, according to their assessment, would be capable and qualified to carry out the procurement with certainty. Procurement by way of limited invitation is carried out in two phases. In the first phase, the purchaser:    makes a public invitation to all interested parties to submit applications for participation in the procurement procedure;   establishes their economic and financial, and technical capacities, and   selects a sufficient number of eligible candidates in order to ensure real competition, and at least three.  In the second phase the purchaser forwards a written invitation without public announcement to all selected and eligible candidates to make a bid. Only invited candidates may make a bid. The public procurement procedure by way of negotiation is an exclusive procedure and may be applied only in a limited number of cases provided by the Law on Public Procurement, and upon prior consent by the Public Procurement Bureau. Prior consent is sought by a written request stating the reasons and the explanation for the need of such procurement, evidence for satisfaction of the requirements for applying this mode of procurement, the value of the procurement and other information about the procurement. Public procurement may be carried out by way of a negotiation procedure without previous publication of a public announcement when: 
  after previously conducting two procedures of open or limited invitation there were not a sufficient number of bids or appropriate bids, provided that the tender documentation of these invitations has not been substantially altered;    due to technical, intellectual or performance reasons or for reasons related to the protection of exclusive rights registered with the Ministry of Economy or the Chamber of Commerce of the Republic of Macedonia, the procurement may be carried out only by a certain service provider or contractor or forwarder;   due to emergency caused by events that could not have been foreseen by the purchaser and which may be attributed as an omission to the purchaser or due to events (natural disasters, epidemics, communicable diseases or force majeure) that prevent observing the term provided for the open or limited procedure;    the purchaser must carry out additional deliveries from the first bidder due to partial replacement of the usual goods or installations; extension of existing goods or installations where the change of bidder would oblige the purchaser to purchase materials with different technical features, which would result in incompatibility or disproportionate technical difficulties in work and maintenance;   due to unforeseen circumstances it is required to carry out the necessary additional work that was not included in the contract under revision or concluded, provided that:    the additional work cannot be technically or economically separated from the primary contract without greater difficulties for the purchaser; and   the additional work, even though it can be separated from the execution of the primary contract, is necessary for its later stages, i.e. for its execution. The overall amount of procurements awarded for additional work as referred to in the above indents may not exceed 20% of the amount of the primary contract, and the length of such procurement, as well as of extended procurement must not exceed three years. The procurement of a project or a plan in the field of physical and urban planning, architecture, civil engineering and data processing is carried out by the purchaser on the basis of a project development competition.  Participation in the competition is anonymous and the number of applied candidates at the competition must ensure real competition and it must not be lower than three.  The project or the plan is selected by an independent jury comprising exclusively natural persons independent of the competition participants and who cannot take part in the competition. When a special professional qualification is required from competition participants, then at least one third of the jury members must have the same or appropriate professional qualifications as the candidates.  The jury is independent in its decision for selecting the best project on the basis of the competition criteria.  The purchaser shall make known the result of the competition and the information about the participant whose projects has been chosen by announcing it in the public information media. A limited invitation for consulting services is related to intellectual services (studies, projects, research, examination, experiments, industrial studies and using copyrights), leading towards the selection of the competent candidate in the appropriate field. The limited invitation for consulting services determines the subject of the services, the requirements (criteria) that candidate authors in the competition must meet etc. A limited invitation for consulting services is carried out according to the procedures for limited invitation in accordance with the provisions of the Law on Public Procurement. Bidders for intellectual services attach to the bid projects, studies, works, patents, licenses etc. confirming their competence and ability to carry out the consulting service that is the subject of the procurement. In the event that consulting services have a degree of confidentiality, they must be designated with the degree of confidentiality and accompanied by security measures. Bid for consulting services are reviewed by a jury appointed by the purchaser. On third of the jury members shall be external and from the field of the service sought, and they shall have a consulting vote. The jury may conduct an interview with each bidder for intellectual services, where each bidder/candidate may further detail, complete or alter his/her bid. The bidder/candidate attaches to the bid a compensation request, i.e. the price of the service, which must be elaborated on and must not be divulged. The compensation, i.e. the price may be reduced by the purchaser if the service was not provided with sufficient quality. The jury shall prepare minutes with an elaborated opinion and submit them to the purchaser. In the course of the year the purchaser may conduct procurement of lesser value to purchase goods, services and work of lesser volume and value up to the amount of 3,000 euro in denar equivalent value, where they need to ensure at least three bids and select the best bid. The purchaser may conduct procurement of lesser value only once in the course of the year for a certain type or group of goods, services and work.  The purchaser, in accordance with the provisions of the Law on Public Procurement, may negotiate the terms of procurement with the bidders, i.e. with the candidates they have selected, only in the event when the procurement is carried out by way of a negotiation procedure pursuant to Articles 66 and 67 of the Law. In accordance with Article 8 paragraph 1 of the Law on Public Procurement, any negotiation between the purchaser and the bidder in the open and limited invitation regarding prices and bid alteration is prohibited. In accordance with paragraph 2 of the above Article, the purchaser may require the bidder to elaborate on the bid, without an option to alter it, where the bidder shall provide such elaboration before the jury and it shall be entered in the minutes. 
4. Do you have any local, regional or national preferences schemes? What do they consist of? 
The Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of RM” No.19/2004), does not contain provisions for local, regional or national privileges in conducting public procurement procedures. Namely, in accordance with Article 2 paragraph 1 item 4 from the Law on Public Procurement, a bidder is any domestic or foreign legal or natural person supplying or providing goods, services and works, who has made a bid. The purchaser, in accordance with Article 6 paragraph 1 from the Law, provides fair competition, equality and non-discrimination of bidders, transparency and publicity in public procurement.  In accordance with paragraph 2 of the above Article, the purchaser may not discriminate in terms of citizenship of the bidder or the country of origin of the goods. Furthermore, in accordance with Article 36 paragraph 4 from the Law, in the tender documentation the purchaser may not specify for the subject of procurement the technical features of a specific brand, model or type, origin of manufacturing etc.  When the purchaser is not able to describe in the tender documentation the subject of the procurement in a way that the specifications are sufficiently understandable for bidders, stating the elements such as a protected brand, patent, type or manufacturer must be designated with the words "or equivalent”. 
5. Do you have any plans to modify existing legislation? If so, please give all relevant details and timetables. 
The new Law on Public Procurement was adopted by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia on 26 March 2004 (“Official Gazette of RM” No.19/2004), and entered into force on 7 April 2004. The existing Law on Public Procurement in the Republic of Macedonia incorporates the following EU directives on public procurement, as follows: 
 Council Directive 89/665/EEC of 21 December 1989 on the coordination of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of review procedures to the award of public supply and public works contracts; 
 Council Directive 92/13/EEC of 25 February 1992 coordinating the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the application of Community rules on the procurement procedures of entities operating in the water, energy, transport and telecommunications sectors; 
 Council Directive 93/36/EEC of 14 June 1993 coordinating procedures for the award of public supply contracts; 
 Council Directive 93/37/EEC of 14 June 1993 concerning the coordination of procedures for the award of public works contracts; 
 Council Directive 93/38/EEC of 14 June 1993 coordinating the procurement procedures of entities operating in the water, energy, transport and telecommunications sectors; Furthermore, the following secondary legislation has been adopted in accordance with the Law on Public Procurement:   A list establishing the entities subject to the provisions of the Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of RM” 34/2004), adopted on the basis of article 1 paragraph 3 of the Law;   Rulebook on the form and contents of the annual public procurement plan (“Official Gazette of RM” 33/2004), adopted on the basis of article 11 paragraph 7 of the Law;   Rulebook on the procedure for opening bids in open invitation and limited invitation and for the form for taking minutes of opening the bids (“Official Gazette of RM” 50/2004), adopted on the basis of article 46 paragraph 4 of the Law;   Decision on determining equipment, materials and services of defensive and security nature (“Official Gazette of RM” 69/2004) to which the law does not apply, in accordance with Article 3 paragraph 2 of the Law;   Decision for appointing president, members and their deputies in the Commission for complaints for public procurement (“Official Gazette of RM” 39/98, 72/2000 and 33/2003), adopted on the basis of Article 61 paragraph 1 of the Law; Other secondary legislation is in preparation, which will help in the implementation of the existing Law and which will be adopted by the end of December 2004, as follows:   Rulebook on the detailed rules for estimating the value of the procurement, to be adopted on the basis of Article 9 paragraph 2 of the Law.   Rulebook on the form and contents of the form and on the manner of keeping the purchasers’ registry of conducted procurements, to be adopted on the basis of Article 17 paragraph 5 of the Law.   Rulebook on the form and contents of the form and on the manner of keeping the single registry, to be adopted on the basis of Article 18 paragraph 3 of the Law.   Rulebook on the compulsory elements of the tender documentation, to be adopted on the basis of Article 36 paragraph 10 of the Law.   Methodology for expressing criteria in points, to be adopted on the basis of Article 50 paragraph 5 of the Law. 
 Methodology for expressing criteria in monetary value, to be adopted on the basis of Article 50 paragraph 5 of the Law. 
 Rulebook on the method, terms and procedure for selecting experts who will examine the regularity of the public procurement procedure, to be adopted on the basis of Article 93 paragraph 10 of the Law. Monitoring the implementation of the provisions of the Law on Public Procurement, in accordance with Article 103 paragraph 1 of the Law, is carried out by the Ministry of Finance and the Public Procurement Bureau. The priority activities that the Ministry of Finance is competent for and which are planned for the ensuing period, must take into consideration the commitments arising from the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Union concerning public procurement, contained in Article 68 paragraph 3 and related to harmonising our legislation with that of the EU and adjusting the work in this field to the European standards. Article 68 of the SAA binds the Republic of Macedonia to set the deadline for approximation of the Law on Public Procurement with the EU directives on public procurement to 5 (five) years, i.e. until April 2006. Taking into account that two new EU directives concerning public procurement were adopted in March 2004 (2004/17/EC and 2004/18/EC), by April 2006 Republic of Macedonia, in accordance with Article 68 of the SAA, will also need to incorporate these directives in the Law on Public Procurement. 
B. Structures 

1. Who is responsible for managing the various aspects of public procurement policy? What are the tasks and powers of this (these) body (bodies)? 
In accordance with the provision under Article 112 from the Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of RM” No.19/2004), in force since 7 April 2004, the Public Procurement Bureau was established as a national institution that will take care of the development of the public procurement system, by ensuring legality, rationality, efficiency and transparency in carrying out public procurements, encouraging competition and equality among bidders.  The Bureau has the task to:   put forward proposals for adopting legal and other acts in the field of public procurement;    to follow and analyse the implementation of the law and other public procurement regulations, the operation of the public procurement system, as well as to initiate changes for its improvement;   to provide opinions regarding the application of the law and the secondary legislation;    to provide advice and assistance for purchasers;   to prepare standard tender documentation and forms for the procedures for open and limited invitation and for the negotiation procedures;    to  keep a unique registry and sub-registries for procurements and purchasers, which will be available to the public through the website for public procurements;    to ensure full transparency both in terms of publishing an indicative announcement for the public procurements that any purchaser plans to carry out during the year and in terms of their execution, whereby competition will be encouraged; as regards the irregularities established on the basis of information from purchasers on the conducted public procurement procedures, the Bureau notifies the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Minister of finance;    to establish the minimum requirements for the professional qualifications of the persons to carry out professional work for public procurements;    on the basis of a previously adopted programme it shall carry out education training for persons who will carry out public procurement procedures for the entities that the Law relates to;    to have international cooperation regarding the public procurement system with international institutions and other foreign entities;   to issue guides, manuals and a bulleting in order to, on one hand, achieve unified application of public procurement legislation and, on the other hand, enable transparency and encourage competition among bidders, as well as their education. The accomplishment of a part of these tasks of the Bureau has commenced at the end of September 2004 through the execution of the Public Procurement Bureau project funded by the European Commission, and it will be carried out until May 2006. 
2. What review procedures are available in the event of an infringement of public procurement rules? When and to whom are they available? 
In the case of violation of the rules on public procurement, legal protection is regulated with the Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of RM” No.19/2004).  Legal protection is provided at all stages of the public procurement procedure in the form of objection to the Public Procurement Commission of the purchaser and appeal to the Appeals Commission for Public Procurement within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, as well as complaint to the competent basic court following the finality of the decision by the Appeals Commission. An objection is filed by bidders and persons who have obtained tender documentation who are dissatisfied with the method of work and review and assessment of the bids submitted to the Public Procurement Commission. The objection is submitted within two days from discovering the violation.  The Commission reviews the objection and notifies the bidder within three days whether they have accepted or denied it, and the public procurement procedure is halted until such time. If the objection is accepted, the Commission will correct its work, whereas if it is denied, the same shall be submitted to the Appeals Commission for Public Procurement within the Government. An appeal may be submitted by the bidder if he/she is: dissatisfied with the best bid choice, excluded from the first phase in the limited invitation and excluded in the open invitation, as well as persons who have obtained tender documentation. The appeal is submitted to the Public Procurement Commission in two copies and within 8 days from the day of the receipt of notification. The Public Procurement Commission delivers the appeal to the Appeals Commission for Public Procurement within the Government and to the Public Procurement Bureau, together with an explanation for the appealed findings and copies of the entire documentation of the public procurement procedure.  For the purpose of protecting the interests of bidders and ensuring impartiality in deciding upon appeals, the regularity of public procurement procedures for values exceeding 30,000 euros will be verified by an expert.  The expert is appointed by the Public Procurement Bureau at the request of the bidder. The expert is obliged to prepare, within eight days from the day of submitting the appeal, a written opinion and deliver it to the Appeals Commission, and if the expert deems that the appeal has grounds, they may offer the procedure participants a reconciliation procedure. In the event that no reconciliation agreement is achieved, the documentation and the expert opinion are submitted to the Appeals Commission.  The costs for the revision of the expert are settled by the subjects who requested their engagement, whereas the costs for the reconciliation procedure are charged on both parties equally. The Appeals Commission is obliged, within 15 days from receipt of the appeal, to decide upon the appeal allegations. Following the finality of the decision by the Appeals Commission, the appellant is entitled to seek protection before a competent basic court. Supervision of the implementation of the provisions referred to in the Law on Public Procurement is carried out by the Central Internal Audit within the Ministry of Finance and the Public Procurement Bureau.  The Central Internal Audit carries out inspection supervision of: providing procurement funds; implementing procurement procedures; organising authorities for execution of procurements; procurement records; establishing documentation for procurement and contract execution. The Public Procurement Bureau prepares an annual report on the findings of the supervision and it shall submit it through the Government to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. The annual report contains the number and type of conducted public procurement, the amount and the funds for public procurement, as well as the problems in conducting procurements. 
3. What bodies (of administrative or judicial character) are responsible for the review procedures in the field of public procurement? 
Supervision of the public procurement procedures is carried out by the Central Internal Audit within the Ministry of Finance.  The Public Procurement Commission of the purchaser is authorised to decide on objections from the participants in the public procurement.  The Appeals Commission for Public Procurement within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia is authorised to decide on objections denied by the Public Procurement Commission, appeals from the participants in the public procurement and appeals on the decision for halting the procurement procedure by the auditor in the Central Internal Audit.  Control of the use of funds for public procurement is carried out by the State Audit Office.  Basic courts decide upon appeals on final decisions of the Appeals Commission. 
4. What powers are conferred on these review bodies? 
The Central Internal Audit is authorised to:   Issue a decision determining measures and deadlines for removing established irregularities and faults in the implementation of an ongoing procurement;   Order halting of the initiated procurement procedure if the purchaser has not removed the irregularities and faults pursuant to a previously issued decision;   If it is established that the violation of the procurement procedure constitutes a misdemeanour or a crime, immediately file a request for initiating a misdemeanour, i.e. criminal procedure.  The Public Procurement Commission is authorised to accept or deny the objection by the bidders and if they decline to forward it to the Appeals Commission for Public Procurement.  The Appeals Commission for Public Procurement within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia receives appeals through the Public Procurement Commission and is authorised to decide on the appeals independently or with the assistance of an expert. In the event that the expert fails to reconcile the parties, the Appeals Commission is authorised within 15 days to:   Reject the appeal as unfounded;   Annul the decision for choice of best bid;   Annul the executed procedure if they establish that the first-degree commission has applied the legal provisions wrongfully. Following the final decision of the Appeals Commission, the appellant is entitled to seek protection before a competent basic court. 
C. Publication 

1. Where do entities publish tender notices? 
The manner of publishing the invitation is regulated in the Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of RM” No.19/2004), in Article 30. The procurement invitation with the procedures established in Article 29 from the Law, i.e. by open invitation, limited invitation, project development competition and limited invitation for consulting services, must compulsorily be published in the Official Gazette within 10 days from the receipt of the invitation in PE Official Gazette of RM. The invitation may also be published free of charge on the website of the Public Procurement Bureau, within three days following the delivery of the electronic version. The invitation for procurement of goods and services whose value exceeds 400,000 euros in denar equivalent value and for works whose purchase value exceeds 1,000,000 euros in denar equivalent value, which, in accordance with Article 12 of the Law on Public Procurement is mandatory carried out by international tender, is also published in the Official Journal of the EU and, if necessary, in the official public information media in non-EU countries selected by the purchaser. In the event of different times of publication of the invitation, the deadline in the invitation published in the Official Gazette of RM shall apply. 
2. What is the present situation in relation to publication? Please give some statistics, including the number of notices published. 
The new Law on Public Procurement, based on European principles and standards, was adopted on 26 March 2004 by the Assembly of RM, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic Macedonia No. 19/2004 and entered into force on 7 April 2004. Following the entry into force of the Law on Public Procurement, public procurement tenders with a procedure for open or limited invitation are carried out through: project development competition and invitation for consulting services are mandatory published in the Official Gazette of RM. According to the overview for the period since 7 April, i.e. from the entry into force of the Law on Public Procurement and until 30 September, a total of 1,664 tenders, i.e. public procurement invitations were published in the Official Gazette of RM. According to the types of procedures, the situation with published tenders, i.e. public procurement invitations, for the aforementioned period is the following:   a total of 1,505 tenders have been published with an open invitation procedure;   the open invitation procedure was repeated for 124 tenders;   a total of 29 tenders have been published with a restricted invitation procedure;   the limited invitation procedure was repeated for 3 tenders;   3 tenders have been published with a competition for project development. 
D. Legal framework 

1. Which measures have been taken to adapt your administrative and judicial system to the framework conditions necessary to make the legislation work? Do you plan to take additional measures in this respect? 
In May 2004 a Sector for the Public Procurement System has been established within the Ministry of Finance as a transitory organisation form at the national level before the establishment of the Public Procurement Bureau, in accordance with the Law on Public Procurement (“Official Gazette of RM” No.19/2004). The establishment of the Public Procurement Bureau is an important step undertaken for adjusting the administrative system necessary for the functioning of the legislation. Within the accomplishment of the Public Procurement Bureau project there are activities underway for identifying the real needs for adequate organisational set-up and appropriate staffing of the Bureau in order to respond to the legally prescribed competencies.  Within the same project, there will be permanent education of civil servants in the Bureau through trainings, participation at seminars and organising workshops. These activities are at the preparation stage. At the next stage, the Public Procurement Bureau, based on a previously developed programme, will carry out training of experts with the purchasers by organising seminars, trainings and workshops.   The adjustment of the IT system of the Bureau will allow not only monitoring the procedures for entities to which the law applies, but statistic and analytic processing of the data from the procurements carried out both at the national level and by separate categories of entities (e.g. budget beneficiaries, budget beneficiary individuals, public enterprises established by the state, public enterprises established by local self-government units, local self-government units etc.). Bidders may submit objections or appeals at several stages of the public procurement procedure (e.g. to tender documentation, to the work of the Commission in the public opening of the bids, to the decision for selection of best bid, to the decision for selection of best candidates at the first stage of the limited invitation).  After submitting the objection, the Commission of the purchaser, if they consider it justified, may accept it and correct their conduct, and if they consider the objection not justified, they forward it to the Appeals Commission for Public Procurement within the Government of the Republic of Macedonia as an authority in the second instance, which rules on it within three days. In the appeal procedure, the Appeals Commission is obliged, within 15 days from receipt of the appeal, to decide upon the appeal allegations. The decision of the Commission is final. Following the finality of the decision by the Appeals Commission, the appellant is entitled to initiate court proceedings before the competent basic court. In accordance with Article 68 of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Union, by April 2006 the Republic of Macedonia will have to incorporate the two new directives on public procurement (2004/17/EC and 2004/18/EC) in the Law on Public Procurement. This harmonisation of public procurement legislation in the Republic of Macedonia with the European one assumes adequate adjustment of the administrative system, which will be subject to realisation of the Public Procurement Bureau project. 

