I. HORIZONTAL LEGISLATION AND IMPLEMENTING INFRASTRUCTURE 
A. Legal basis and administration 

1. What is the legal basis and administrative structure for technical regulations, standards, conformity assessment, accreditation, certification, metrology and market surveillance? 
The framework of the activities that the Republic of Macedonia must undertake to meet the commitments arising from the Stabilisation and Association Agreement was established in accordance with the National Programme on Quality, adopted by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia in 2001. Among other activities, a priority for the 2001-2003 period was the establishment of a legal framework for technical regulations, standards, conformity assessment, accreditation, certification, metrology and market surveillance. The projected activities have been carried out and the following laws are the current legal basis that regulate the  administrative structure:   The Law on Standardisation (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 54/2002)   The Metrology Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/2002)    The Law on Accreditation (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 54/2002)   The Law on Prescribing Technical Requirements for Products and Conformity Assessment  (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/2002)   The Law on Market Inspection (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 35/97, 23/99, 7/2002)   The Trade Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 16/2004)   The Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 38/2004) The abovementioned Laws are in conformity with European legislation.   The Law on the Quality Control of Agricultural and Food Products in Foreign Trade Circulation (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 5/98) The Law on Standardisation 
This Law regulates the objectives and principles of Macedonian national standardisation, the status of the Institute for Standardisation of the Republic of Macedonia (ISRM), as well as its tasks, membership and funding, preparation, adoption and publication of Macedonian national standards and their application. The primary objectives of Macedonian national standardisation consist of improving:   product quality, the procedures and services by defining their features which determine their capacity to satisfy certain requirements;   the quality of life and people’s health, property safety, and environmental and nature protection;   the cost-effectiveness and rationality in using manpower, materials and energy in the process of production and exchange of goods;   Industrial efficiency by reducing and harmonising the variety of certain products, processes and services, as well as the possibility to replace a product, process or service with another meeting the same requirements; and   international trading in goods and services by removing obstacles to trade. Macedonian national standardisation is based on the following principles:   voluntary application of Macedonian standards;   the right of all stakeholders to take part in the development of Macedonian standards, protection from domination of individual over common interests in the Macedonian standard development procedure;   consensus of all stakeholders regarding the contents of Macedonian standards;   transparency of the development procedure for Macedonian standards;   compulsory publication of the adoption of Macedonian standards; and   compliance with the scientific and technical degree of development and experience, as well as compliance with the rules of international and European standardisation. 
The Metrology Law 
This Law regulates the metrology system in the Republic of Macedonia; the competence of the Bureau of Metrology; legal units of measurement; standards; reference materials, circulation and use of measurements; conformity assessment for the type of measurement; verification of measurements; validity of markings and certificates for conformity of the type of measurements and the marks and brands, i.e. the certificates for verifying foreign measurements; metrological supervision of the quantities and markings of packed products; supervision of the implementation of this Law and other issues important for the metrology system in order to provide measurement unification in the Republic of Macedonia. The provisions of this Law relate to the measurements used to ensure:    protection of the health of humans, animals and plants;   environmental and nature protection;   general technical safety;   free trade of goods and services; and   procedure before administrative and judicial authorities. 
The Law on Accreditation 
This Law regulates the establishment, setup and operation of the Macedonian Institute for Accreditation as a public institution carrying out the work and tasks of a national accreditation service, as well as the accreditation procedure carried out in accordance with this and other laws and regulations adopted on the basis of law and supervision of meeting accreditation requirements. The Institute for Accreditation of the Republic of Macedonia (IARM) primarily issues accreditation to:    testing and calibration laboratories;   product certification authorities;   quality systems certification authorities;   authorities certifying environmental and nature protection systems;   person certification authorities; and   inspection (control) authorities. The Institute for Accreditation of the Republic of Macedonia carries out the accreditation procedure on the basis of this Law and other laws and in conformity with the requirements contained in the relevant national, European and international standards and documents of European and international accreditation organisations. Accreditation is a public interest activity. The Law on Prescribing Technical Requirements for Products and Conformity Assessment  This Law regulates:   the technical requirements that products must comply with;   the manner of releasing in circulation;   the procedure for conformity assessment (testing, certification and inspection control);   Requirements that authorities taking part in the conformity assessment procedure must meet;   the documents accompanying the product when released in circulation;   the authority in charge of supervising the product market;   the method of and obligation for product marking. Technical requirements primarily concern:   the exercise and protection of public interest;    the protection of the life and health of humans, animals and plants;   protection and improvement of the environment; and   nature and protection of consumers and other product users. 
The Law on Market Inspection 
This Law regulates the competencies, authorisations and organisation of the State Market Inspectorate. 
The Trade Law 
The Trade Law regulates trading both on the domestic and on the foreign market, enabling unhindered trading and establishment of mutual trust and cooperation among WTO members which, in turn, will contribute to reducing trade barriers and provide an equal treatment of trading subjects on the market. This Law regulates the conditions for carrying out wholesale and retail operations, sales on wholesale and retail markets, trade services etc.  The Trade Law is the only law regulating trading both on the domestic and on the foreign market, enabling unhindered trading by establishing mutual trust and cooperation among WTO members which, in turn, will contribute to reducing trade barriers and provide an equal treatment of trading subjects on the market. Trade will stimulate economic development, opening markets, a larger selection of products, as well as establishing greater safety and discipline in the circulation of goods and provision of services in this field. The Trade Law succinctly provides for the obligations of traders for a market approach, as well as for strengthening the authorisations and competencies of the inspection authorities in its enforcement. In accordance with the Trade Law, the trader is obliged to report the satisfaction of the minimum technical requirements and the commencement of operations to the State Market Inspectorate and to the competent municipal authority, i.e. the city of Skopje, at least 15 days prior to the commencement of operations of the sales or other business premises. The procedure for establishing the minimum technical requirements for carrying out a certain activity is simplified with the adoption of the Law. In accordance with the Law, the trader is obliged to report the satisfaction of the requirements to the State Market Inspectorate and to the competent municipal authority, i.e. the city of Skopje, at least 15 days prior to the commencement of operations of the sales or other business premises. The form and contents of the form is specially prescribed with a Rulebook adopted by the Minister of Economy. The State Market Inspectorate does not adopt a special act on the basis of the report, and the establishment of requirements is carried out by regular supervision. 
The Consumer Protection Law  
This Law regulates the protection of consumer rights, the conditions and manner of consumer protection, the requirements for trade operations relevant for consumer rights protection, the rights and obligations of consumer associations, as well as the competencies of state administration authorities as regards consumer protection. The Law contains a provision equalling the importer to the manufacturer for the purpose of consumer protection. A novelty in this law, in the interest of consumer protection, is the enhancement of administrative measures imposing removal of flaws within a set term. However, if the trader fails to remove the flaws within the set term, more drastic measures are applied. 
The Law on the Quality Control of Imported Agricultural and Food Products  
The State Market Inspectorate carries quality control of agricultural and food products in foreign trade circulation on the basis of the provisions of the Law on the Quality Control of Agricultural and Food Products in Foreign trade Circulation (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 5/1998), as well as on the basis of standards and secondary legislation, i.e. rulebooks.  This law regulates the method of quality control of certain agricultural and food products, as well as their processed products, in foreign trade circulation. Quality control of products is considered the control of the physical, chemical and organoleptic features of the product, the quantity, declaration, packaging, labelling, the means of transport and transport. Quality control within the meaning of this law does not relate to health, veterinary and sanitary and phyto-sanitary control of product safety. 
2. How are these functions organised, implemented and co-ordinated? 
Current structure in the Republic of Macedonia and description of the coordination and implementation of functions: Structure: 1. The regulatory functions are carried out through: 
  the competent ministries:   the coordinator – the Ministry of Economy 2. The repressive functions are carried out through: 
  the customs authorities and   the market surveillance authorities 3. The preventive functions are carried out through 
  The Institute for Standardisation of the Republic of Macedonia   The Metrology Bureau   The Institute for Accreditation of the Republic of Macedonia   The network of laboratories, certification authorities and inspection (control) authorities In accordance with the Law on Prescribing Technical Requirements for Products and Conformity Assessment (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/02), the adoption of technical requirements (secondary legislation) is within the competence of the relevant ministries (the Ministry of Economy, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Economy, the Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning, the Ministry of Transport and Communications). 
Free movement of goods Competent ministries Regulatory functions Repressive functions Customs authorities Market surveillance authorities Certification authorities Laboratories Preventive functions IARM ISRM BM Inspection (control) authorities 
The State Market Inspectorate The State Market Inspectorate works as a body within the Ministry of Economy. The work is carried out through the Inspection Supervision Sector and the eight departments on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. The Inspection Supervision Sector organises the operative activity of the departments within the sector through which state market inspector carry out immediate inspection supervision of the application of laws and regulations and other acts in the field of trading in goods and services, quality of products and services in manufacture and trade, product prices and services in manufacturing and trade, consumer protection, quality control of agricultural and food products in foreign trade circulation, and it carries out other work stipulated by law and other regulations. It organises cooperation at the sector and department level, cooperation among departments and institutional cooperation.  Depending on current events there is open cooperation for organising supervision together with other state authorities (the Ministry of Interior, the Public Revenue Office, the Customs Administration) and consumer associations. The Sector also undertakes measures and activities for pre-service and in-service training of inspectors both internally and externally. At the internal level, it organises inspector meetings in order to ensure the introduction of a principle of uniformity and unification of the procedure in the implementation and application of legal and other regulations, organises seminars, meetings and counselling for the purpose of education training and upgrading of inspectors. At the external level, the Sector delegates and ensures participation at seminars, counselling, commissions organised by the Ministry of Economy or another institution in the Republic of Macedonia or abroad. The inspectorate is managed by a director appointed by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The operative management function is awarded to a sector manager appointed by the Minister of Economy. The departments are managed by managers, who are also appointed by the Minister of Economy. Within the Sector there is an executive group enforcing coercive execution of executive decisions made by market inspectors concerning in-kind liabilities. 
The Institute for Standardisation of the Republic of Macedonia (ISRM) 

The Government of the Republic of Macedonia has established the Institute for Standardisation of the Republic of Macedonia (ISRM), as a separate institution, with a view to carrying out the work and tasks in the field of standardisation, as established by the Law on Standardisation and other laws. The Standardisation Institute acts as a legal entity. The Standardisation Institute carries out, in particular, the following tasks and activities:   development and adoption of Macedonian standards and other standardisation documents comprising Macedonian national standardisation;   keeping a registry of Macedonian standards;   representing the interests of Macedonian national standardisation in international, European and regional organisations, as well as standardisation organisations in other countries;   gathering international and European standards and standardisation documents, establishing and maintaining a database for the same, as well as standards and standardisation documents of other national standardisations;   providing information from the database for interested parties;   issuing a publication containing information about the commencement and course of the procedure for developing and adopting standards and standardisation documents of Macedonian national standardisation, as well as information about international and European standards and standardisation documents;   issue and sale of standards and other standardisation documents of Macedonian national standardisation, as well as sale of international, European and other standards and standardisation documents;   promoting the application of Macedonian standards;   participation in the work of international and regional standardisation authorities;   sale of standards and standardisation documents on the basis of agreements and membership of international and regional organisations, and other foreign standardisation authorities;   carrying out the commitments in the field of standardisation arising from the international agreements the Republic of Macedonia has ratified; and   carrying out other work and tasks concerning enforcement of the Law on Standardisation and other laws. The work carried out by the Institute for Standardisation is not profit oriented. Within the Standardisation Institute there is an Information Contact Authority (inquiry point). For the purpose of developing regulations regulating technical requirements for products, in order to ensure safety of property and protection of people’s life and health and of the environment, the Institute for Standardisation develops, adopts and publishes appropriate standards at the request of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The Institute for Standardisation has Articles of Incorporation adopted by the Institute Assembly, regulating the name, head office location and its setup, its authorities and their competencies and responsibilities, the rights and obligations of members of the Institute, as well as other issues related to carrying out the activity for which the Institute, in accordance with this and other laws and the incorporation act, has been established. The Articles of Association are subject to consent by the Minister of Economy. The bodies of the Institute are as follows:  the Assembly;  the Council;   the Director; and   the Material and Financial Operations Control Board. The Assembly consists of the members of the Institute. The Assembly is chaired by a chairman. The chairman is elected by the Assembly. The body managing the work of the Institute is the Institute Council. The chairman and the members of the Institute Council are appointed and dismissed by the Institute Assembly from the line of eminent and competent experts in the field of standardisation for a four-year term. The Institute is managed by a director. The director of the Institute organises and manages the work of the Institute, represents and acts on behalf of the institute with third parties and is responsible for the legality of the Institute’s work. The director of the Institute is appointed and dismissed by the Council.  The decision for appointing and dismissing the director is subject to consent by the Government of the Republic of Macedonia. The director of the Institute is appointed for a four-year term and may be re-elected following the expiry of his/her term. The Council establishes technical committees for the purpose of carrying out expert work. Twenty technical committees have been established so far, involving more than 200 national experts, and applying 11,610 Macedonian standards.  These standards are classified in 18 branches and 177 primary groups. 
The Bureau of Metrology (BM) 
The Bureau of Metrology (BM) is established as an authority within the Ministry of Economy for the purpose of carrying out expert and other work in the field of Metrology laid down in the Metrology Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/2002) and other laws. The Bureau acts as a legal entity. The Bureau is managed by a director. The Bureau of Metrology carries out the work and tasks in the field of the metrology system of the Republic of Macedonia related to:   supervision of the use and writing of statutory units of measurement;   ensuring monitoring, exercise, keeping and maintenance of national standards and certified reference materials;   ensuring monitoring of reference standards;   calibration of standards and measures;   taking part in the procedure for accrediting calibration and testing laboratories on the basis of the Law on Accreditation;   supervision of the work of legal entities authorised for carrying out certain activities in the field of metrology on the basis of this law;   conformity assessment of the type of measures;  verification of measures;   the registration procedure for recognising the validity of labels and certificates for conformity of the type of measures, labels and brands, i.e. of the foreign certificates for measures verification;   metrological supervision of the quantities and labelling of packaged products;   expert supervision of the application of the provisions of this law and the provisions adopted on the basis of this and other laws;   permanent training and education of employees in the Bureau and in the authorised legal entities;   defining the work and tasks of the metrological council and taking part in its work;   consulting services for the needs of legal and natural persons involved in circulation or use of measures;   cooperation with other inspection authorities; and   other work and tasks related to the enforcement of the Metrology Law and the regulations adopted on the basis of this law.   The Bureau is a member of and represents the Republic of Macedonia in international and regional organisations in the field of metrology; it cooperates with them and takes part in their work. The Minister of economy establishes a Metrology Council operating as an expert and advisory body for the Bureau in the field of metrology. The Bureau issues a bulletin. 
The Institute for Accreditation of the Republic of Macedonia (IARM) 
The Government of the Republic of Macedonia has established the Institute for Accreditation of the Republic of Macedonia (IARM), as a public institution, with a view to carrying out the work and tasks in the field of accreditation, as established by the Law on Accreditation (“Official Gazette of RM” 54/02). The Institute acts as a legal entity.  The Institute for Accreditation of the Republic of Macedonia (IARM) primarily handles accreditation to:   testing and calibration laboratories;   product certification authorities;   quality systems certification authorities;   authorities certifying environmental and nature protection systems;   person certification authorities;  inspection authorities; Furthermore, the Institute  for Accreditation:   is a member of and takes part in the work of European and international accreditation organisations and represents the interests of the Republic of Macedonia therein;   provides opinions to state authorities on issues related to accreditation and provides opinions on approvals of capability to carry out the conformity assessment procedure;   assesses and approves the competency of conformity assessment authorities, including assessment of requirements satisfaction for authorities carrying out conformity assessment according to the relevant regulations. The Institute works in accordance with the laws and other regulations providing for the operation of public institutions, unless otherwise provided with this law. The work carried out by the Institute is not profit oriented. The Institute is a member of and represents the Republic of Macedonia in European and international organisations in the field of accreditation; it cooperates with them and takes part in their work. Government of RMAccreditation Board  Objections committeeIARMSector for accreditation of testing and calibration laboratoriesUnit for accreditation of testing laboratoriesUnit for accreditation of calibration laboratoriesGeneral unitMaterial and financial operations control commissionIARM Council Technical committeesQuality manager Pool of external evaluators  and expertsSector for accreditation of certificationand inspection authoritiesUnit for accreditation of certification authoritiesUnit for accreditation of inspection authoritiesPerson assessment committee
Laboratories, certification authorities and inspection (control) authorities 
In the Republic of Macedonia there is an inherited network of laboratories, certification and inspection (control) authorities, whose status has been identified according to the old legal framework and the old principle of approval, authorisation and accreditation. In future they will be accredited in accordance with the Law on Accreditation and the relevant international and European standards in order to assess and confirm their technical competence. Part of them are already in an accreditation procedure (more than 15 accreditation applications). In the regulated field, on the basis of accreditation, the competent minister may issue authorisation in accordance with the Law on Prescribing Technical Requirements for Products and Conformity Assessment (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/02). Within the World Bank mission from 15 September to 1 October 2004, among other things, the improvement of the quality of the system of standardisation, accreditation, metrology, certification and market surveillance has been taken into consideration for the purpose of developing a project for strengthening institutional capacity in the Republic of Macedonia for promoting economic growth and further preparation of the country for EU membership. This project component shall be carried out in cooperation with EC/EAR. 
3. What is the basis for product conformity regulation and to what extent has your legislation moved towards the principles applied in European harmonised legislation, i.e. minimum requirements, absence of mandatory standards, self certification and the presumption of conformity? 
The basis for the regulations on product conformity is, as follows:   the Law on Standardisation (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 54/2002)   the Metrology Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/2002)   the Law on Accreditation (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 54/2002)   the Law on Prescribing Technical Requirements for Products and Conformity Assessment (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/2002)    the Consumer Protection Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No.  38/2004)    the Trade Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 16/2004) The Laws have been prepared with the technical assistance of the EU and they incorporate the principles of European law and good practice in this field. These Laws are the basis for further implementation of technical legislation and that implementation is underway. It is projected to adopt a Law on General Product Safety, which is covered by the GTZ project - Transposition of New Approach Directives in the National Legislation and the TWINNING project with the Republic of Slovenia - Approximation of Legislation to the Internal Market Acquis-free movement of goods, as well as to transpose 10 EU directives from the New Approach, for which a special Action Plan has been developed and it is a constituent part of the National Programme for Approximation of Legislation. 
B. Regulation/Administrative capacity 

Do the relevant ministries and technical organisations have sufficient numbers of adequately trained staff to master the technicalities of law-making and to ensure adequate co-ordination? Please specify. 
In accordance with the conclusions of 22.03.2004 of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia, in the Programme for Approximation of the National Legislation to the Legislation of the European Union, the competencies of the relevant ministries have been established in terms of harmonising legislation on the planned legal regulations, i.e. implementation of EU directives from the New Approach into Macedonian Legislation. The readiness and capability of the relevant ministries to carry out this implementation and coordination process will be assessed at the first stage of this process, aided by the SMAQV’a project-Technical Assistance to the Institutes of Standardisation, Accreditation, Metrology and Quality Validation  and the TWINNING project – Approximation of National Legislation to the Internal Market Acquis-free movement of goods, with the Republic of Slovenia, which will be a basis for the development of a detailed implementation plan. The competent ministries which have established working groups for the implementation of EU directives of the New and Sector Approach do not currently have a sufficient number of trained staff for those tasks. The Institute for Standardisation of the Republic of Macedonia, the Institute for Accreditation of the Republic of Macedonia and the Bureau of Metrology have adequately trained staff, but insufficient number to support the ministries which will harmonise the technical legislation of RM with the technical legislation of EU. EU technical assistance defining the plan for restructuring the staff policy and new employment is used to enhance the capacity of the relevant ministries and technical organisations. 
C. Standardisation 
1. Is the Standardisation Institute able to implement European and international standards? Has the Standardisation Institute made a needs assessment for investment and technical expertise required to participate in the European standards system? 
In accordance with the Law on Standardisation (“Official Gazette of RM” No.54/2002) and the Articles of Incorporation (December 2003), the Institute for Standardisation of the Republic of Macedonia (hereinafter: ISRM) is the national standardisation authority competent for establishing the technical infrastructure for standardisation consisting of technical working bodies (technical committees and working groups) in whose work all stakeholders may be involved: government institutions (ministries, bodies within ministries), the economy, the industry, scientific and education institution, non-governmental citizen associations, the chamber of commerce etc. Twenty technical committees have been established so far involving more than 200 experts in the areas the committees cover. There is an analysis of the current status of activities and of the need for future activities in the field of standardisation. On the basis of this analysis, a proposal has been developed for establishing the necessary technical infrastructure (technical committees) for adopting the European standards as Macedonian.  It is projected to establish forty more technical committees in the course of three stages in the subsequent three-year period, adding up to a total of sixty technical committees whose scope of operations will cover the work on CEN, CENELEC and ETSI. The process of harmonising the technical legislation in the Republic of Macedonia with EU legislation is within the competence of the relevant ministries. This process also determines the dynamics of transposition of European standards. Taking into consideration the current situation and the expected future development, the taking European standards as Macedonian will largely be carried out by the endorsement method. There is an appraisal of the number of harmonised EU standards from the ten New Approach directives designated as a priority for implementation in the legislation of the Republic of Macedonia. In accordance with the requirements for accession membership of European standardisation organisations, ISRM plans to improve the technical knowledge necessary for participation in the European standardisation system. The following has been provided within the national CARDS programme – the SMAQV’a project - Technical Assistance to the Institutes of Standardisation, Accreditation, Metrology and Quality Validation  (1 July 2003 – 31 October 2004):   IT (hardware) and telecommunications equipment,    trainings and seminars. The new IT and telecommunications equipment presents a basis for establishing a new information system that will support national standardisation in its participation in European standardisation.  An additional training programme is planned for all parties interested in standardisation, which will improve the technical knowledge required for participation in the European standardisation system. ISRM has made an appraisal of the investment needs for the following:   additional staffing     training, fifteen trainings have been projected within the CARDS–SMAQV’a project - Technical Assistance to the Institutes of Standardisation, Accreditation, Metrology and Quality Validation  project, participation of ISRM representatives in the CARDS Twinning project between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Slovenia - Approximation of legislation to the Internal Market Acquis – free movement of goods;   creating a software for managing the ISRM information system;   investments for carrying out the process of taking European standards as Macedonian. ISRM has made an appraisal of investments for 2005 for transposing harmonised European standards from the New Approach directives. This appraisal is contained in the Budget for 2005. 
2. Are staff numbers and financing adequate? 
The Institute for Standardisation of the Republic of Macedonia currently has eight (8), employees which is insufficient for carrying out all the work and tasks assigned to ISRM. In accordance with the newly adopted organisation and systematisation of the Institute for Standardisation, it is provided for the total number of employees to increase to 27.  In accordance with Article 19 of the Law on Standardisation, the work and tasks are financed from the Budget of the Republic of Macedonia and from revenue generated from the Institute for Standardisation. STANDARDISATION INSTITUTE OF THE REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA Organisation scheme Assembly Director Deputy director Material and financial operations control board Council Standardisation sector Conformity assessment sector Standards unit Information sector General and legal matters unit Electro-technical standards unit Unit for conformity assessment of products and services Unit for conformity assessment of quality systems and personnel Information unit Publishing and library unit 
3. What percentage of your standards is in conformity with European standards (give separate percentages for CEN, CENELEC and ETSI standards)? 
The basis for preparation of the Programme for adopting European Standards as Macedonian in 2005 is the process of implementation of the ten New Approach directives designated as a priority for the Republic of Macedonia. It is planned to adopt European harmonised standards as Macedonian standards largely by the endorsement method. Five European standards in the field of thermal insulation have been adopted hitherto. The following European standards are in the process of being adopted as Macedonian standards by translation into Macedonian:    20 in the field of civil engineering;     2 in the field of non-destructive examinations – terminology; and    2 in the field of oil derivatives. For the purpose of improvement of the quality infrastructure, the following activities have been targeted for the upcoming period in the field of standardisation:   introduction of a system for fast adoption of European standards; and    modernisation of databases for electronic filing and distribution of standards. 
4. Please indicate (work towards) membership of European and international standards organisations (CEN, CENELEC, ETSI, others). Is there a timetable for achievement of full membership of CEN and CENELEC? What is the relationship with the international (IEC and ISO) standards bodies? 
Since 01.01.1995 the Institute for Standardisation of the Republic of Macedonia has been a full-fledged member of the International Organisation for Standardisation – ISO. The Institute for Standardisation is a full-fledged member in one ISO technical committee and an observer in two technical committees. Due to the lack of funding the work at the meetings of technical committees is insignificant. Since 2001 ISRM (previously the Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology) has taken part in the IEC Accession Members Programme. For the purpose of satisfying the accession membership requirements for CENELEC, ISRM applied for associative membership of IEC on 13.09.2004 in Geneva.  Starting from 14.01.2005, the Institute for Standardisation of the Republic of Macedonia has become an associative member of IEC. ISRM, as the national standardisation authority of the Republic of Macedonia, has been an accession member of CEN since 01.07.2003. There are negotiations for applying and initiating the procedure for accession membership of CENELEC. The necessary preparations have been carried out and the required documentation for accession membership of CENELEC has been prepared. The application for accession membership of CENELEC was submitted on 17.11.2004. It is planned to apply for membership of ETSI. The activities of Macedonian standardisation are focused on accelerated preparations for meeting the nine requirements (legal, organisational and technical) for obtaining the status of a full-fledged member of CEN and CENELEC. The timeline for achieving full-fledged membership of CEN and CENELEC for the Republic of Macedonia is targeted for at least five to six years. 
D. Accreditation 

1. Does your country have an accreditation system and an accreditation body? Is the body independent? Does it have the full range of technical and administrative competencies necessary for the purpose of accrediting certification bodies in line with the European system? 
Does your country have an accreditation system and an accreditation body? Yes, the Institute for Accreditation of the Republic of Macedonia (IARM) is the only national accreditation authority. The framework for the operation of IARM is based on:   the Law on Accreditation (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 54/2002)   the Decision of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia to establish IARM;   the IARM Articles of Incorporation;   the acts of the IARM Council;   the acts of the IARM director;   international and European standards;   the EA, ILAC and IAF documents. Is the body independent? Yes, IARM is an independent in its activities and decisions. The work of IARM is based on the following principles:   transparency and accessibility;   representation of public interests;   voluntary character of accreditation;  independence;  impartiality;   harmonisation and equivalence of procedures;  non-discrimination;   confidence building with clients;  data protection;  non-profit operation. These principles have been incorporated in the documents constituting the operation framework of IARM. 
Standards of work of IARM 
Accreditation Institute (IARM) ISO Guide 61/EN 45010 ISO Guide 58/EN 45003 ISO/IEC 17010 Cert. body for products ISO Guide 65/EN 45011 Cert. body for management systems ISO Guide 62/EN 45012 Testing and calibration Laboratories ISO/IEC 17025  ISO (15189)* Cert. body for personnel EN 45013 Inspection bodies  EN 45004 ISO 17020 Certification of Products Manufacturer Supplier Certification of management systems Manufacturer Supplier Certification ofPersonnelManufacturer Supplier Testing and calibrationManufacturer Supplier InspectionManufacturer Supplier * for medical laboratories 
Does it have the full range of technical and administrative competencies necessary for the purpose of accrediting certification bodies in line with the European system? 
Yes, IARM has the minimum technical and administrative competencies required for accreditation. It has the following:   adequately organised offices, sufficient for accommodating all projected workers in accordance with the systematisation and organisation of IARM;   within the SMAQV’a project - Technical Assistance to the Institutes of Standardisation, Accreditation, Metrology and Quality Validation, by the end of 2004, it will be equipped with the latest  IT equipment. The offices and bodies through which IARM carries out its functions are:  the Council;  the director;   the Material and Financial Operations Control Board:   the Accreditation Board;   the assessment commissions;   the technical committees;   the evaluators and experts committee;   the objections committee. All the IARM infrastructure i.e offices and bodies have been established. 
2. Does it have agreements with European or other international organisations? 
IARM has not signed agreements with European or other international accreditation organisations. 
3. Is it a member or working towards membership of any such organisations? 
The Institute for Accreditation of the Republic of Macedonia (IARM) applied for membership of EA (the European accreditation organisation) in October 2004. It is also planned that in 2005 IARM will apply for membership of two international accreditation organisations - IAF (the International Accreditation Forum) and ILAC (International Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation). 
E. Certification / testing / inspection 

1. What relevant bodies (and in which product sectors) does your country have in these areas? Have you made an assessment of these as regards laboratory practice, equipment and staff training needs? 

What relevant bodies (and in which product sectors) does your country have in these areas? In the Republic of Macedonia there is an inherited network of laboratories, certification and inspection (control) authorities, whose status has been identified according to the old legal framework and old principle of approval, authorisation and accreditation. In future they will be accredited in accordance with the Law on Accreditation and the relevant international and European standards in order to assess and confirm their technical competence. Part of them is already in an accreditation procedure (more than 15 accreditation applications). In the regulated field, on the basis of accreditation, the competent minister may issue authorisation in accordance with the Law on Prescribing Technical Requirements for Products and Conformity Assessment (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/02)  We may sum up that there is an apparent need in the Republic of Macedonia for:   Ensuring conditions for product certification by Macedonian certification authorities whose certificates are recognised by the European and international market, as well as introduction of the principles of a global and modular approach in the conformity procedure.   Introducing national certification authorities who will work in accordance with the criteria laid down in the MKS EN 450 11 and 450 012 standards and which will be competent for product certification. 
Have you made an assessment of these as regards laboratory practice, equipment and staff training needs? An assessment of the situation with laboratories, certification and inspection (control) authorities has been developed in the study within the CARDS–SMAQV’a project - Technical Assistance to the Institutes of Standardisation, Accreditation, Metrology and Quality Validation  (premises, equipment, staff, problems). The study determines the activities targeted as necessary to be carried out in the Republic of Macedonia: 1.  Development of a national conformity assessment system to enable the implementation of product safety requirements, with priority to the areas of interest for the Republic of Macedonia; 2.  The transposition of EU directives from the New Approach and establishing a functional infrastructure for conformity assessment, based on the principles of the EU New Global Approach, must ensure free movement of industrial products; Transposed directives and a developed national conformity assessment system are a basis for signing the PECA protocols guaranteeing the free movement of industrial products; Furthermore, in future, the state authorities for market surveillance will not be able to operate soundly without a developed conformity assessment system. The study proposes to: 1. Develop a document: Strategy for developing and upgrading the national conformity assessment system based on the principles of the EU New and Global approach; 2.  Establish the priority areas covered, in particular, by the New Approach EU directives; 3.  Define which requirements must be satisfied for the competent operation of the national conformity assessment system in the priority areas (independence, impartiality etc.); 4.  Ensure EU technical assistance for personnel training; 5.  Identify possible funding sources for procuring the appropriate equipment; 6.  Ensure funds to prepare the bodies for conformity assessment of accreditation; 7. Determine the organisational concept of the national conformity assessment system (distributed, integrated or combined). Working towards accomplishing the aforementioned activities, within the CARDS–SMAQV’a project - Technical Assistance to the Institutes of Standardisation, Accreditation, Metrology and Quality Validation, in accordance with Articles 5, 68 and 73 of the SAA, the key objective for providing technical assistance for the implementation and unhindered operation of the targeted infrastructure has been achieved, and a sound basis created for implementing the projected activities.  
F. Metrology 

1. What is the present metrology structure in your country? 
The current metrological infrastructure is entirely oriented towards legal metrology and it is maintained well. This infrastructure is inherited from the former Law on Measurement Units and Measures in addition to the inherited technical regulations related to legal metrology, which are largely in accordance with the OIML recommendations - the International Organisation of Legal Metrology.  The greater part of these regulations are still in force and this is related to the metrological regulations on the conformity assessment of certain categories of measures that are much more numerous than the scope of the MID directive and the realistic capacity of the Bureau of Metrology for their implementation.  The Bureau of Metrology verifies mass measuring instruments: measures for mass scales and weights of all types, water gauges, electric meters, taximeters, liquid fuel gauges, thermal energy meters, dosing and packaging control machines, control of precious metal items and others.  Traceability of the measuring instruments through the Bureau of Metrology is difficult to ensure due to, in particular, inadequate equipment and lack of technical personnel, while infrastructure users individually provide monitoring and calibration by foreign institutions. The system of metrology laboratories (authorised and approved) that the Bureau of Metrology coordinates administratively still exists.  The authorised laboratories are legal entities authorised by the Minister of Economy and they meet the requirements for carrying out certain metrological activities – inspection of conformity of the features of the measuring instrument prescribed with a special technical regulation. Approved laboratories are not a special category of the Metrology Law. They were defined by the previous law on units of measurement and measuring instruments. They are legal entities ensuring conditions (equipment, premises and trained personnel) for conformity assessment – verification of the measuring instrument by an officer from the Bureau of Metrology concerning the features of the measuring instrument prescribed by a special technical regulation.  These entities have been informed of the next steps they must take for their integration in the new legal framework for the infrastructure of quality through several purpose-oriented workshops and seminars and they have started to grasp the need of introducing quality systems, especially ISO 17025 for calibration laboratories and evaluation of their competence through the accreditation process. In the transition period, a special Government regulation on approved laboratories has introduced a partnership relationship of agreement with the Bureau of Metrology pending their transition in the new system by asserting their competence through accreditation.  In certain areas that are not traditional for legal metrology, there is scientific metrology (seismology, genetics, and biochemistry) and they need to be integrated in the metrology system. 
2. Is there a national programme for the development of the metrology structure? 
The constitution of the Metrology Council provided a sound basis for the future development of national policies, strategies and programmes for progress in metrology. A draft policy for metrology and a short-term (two-year) development programme on the metrology infrastructure has been prepared and submitted for further Government procedure. This programme is based on the screening of the metrology infrastructure and the recommendations of the experts from the CARDS/SMAQV’a project - Technical Assistance to the Institutes of Standardisation, Accreditation, Metrology and Quality Validation, as well as on the existing documents in this field, such as the National Quality Programme of the Republic of Macedonia and the Action Plan for developing the necessary organisation infrastructure and human resources for meeting the requirements contained in Article 73 of the SAA, and on the adopted policy for developing the national metrology infrastructure, provided below:   Building a competent and independent national metrology institution;     Relying on national resources, including available scientific and technological potential, and on the basis of the support from the international community for metrology infrastructure, a special basis will be provided for the development of the Bureau for Metrology as a carrier of the metrology infrastructure, as well as of its calibration capacities;   Establishing national standards and laboratories;   In particular, guided by the needs and requests of the state, economy and consumer, citizen and environment protection, the relevant national standards and laboratories will be provided;    Providing a basis for certification and inspection activities;     The basis will consist of adequate metrology equipment and know-how of the Bureau for Metrology;    International recognition of the national metrological infrastructure;   Ensure a recognizable Macedonian metrological infrastructure both nationally and internationally, as well as membership of European and international metrology organisations and institutions, through continuous activities, international agreements and international cooperation;     Identifying the necessary areas for sustainable development of our metrological infrastructure;    The areas for sustainable development will be identified on the basis of the particularities of the Macedonian economy and industry in the world globalisation trends;   Information and promotion activities for metrology;    Activities will be organised for building and promoting the national metrological infrastructure by organising workshops on metrology subjects; and    Active participation in the work of international organisations. 
3. How is traceability to international measurement standards ensured? 
The Republic of Macedonia, represented by the Bureau of Metrology, has been a full-fledged member country of OIML – the International Organisation of Legal Metrology – since 1994. A procedure has been initiated before BIPM (the International Bureau of Weights and Measures) in Paris for accomplishing accession membership of CGPM (the General Conference on Weights and Measures) and, thus, of the Meter Convention, with a possibility to sign the MRA (Mutual Recognition Arrangement for calibration and measurement certificates, as one of the requirements for membership of the regional European metrology organisation - EUROMET – though which measurement monitoring may be most adequately ensured.  The current situation is explained in detail in the answer to 01_II_ B._1.  a) first paragraph, and b) contains the explanation for further development.  Recently, the Bureau of Metrology, through the PHARE/PRAQ III programme, took part with its modest technical abilities in the intra comparisons of the metrology institutions of Southeast Europe for mass, length and electrical measures, as well as calibration of their national standards in European calibration laboratories. Technical assistance is necessary for introducing a quality system in the Bureau of Metrology, as one of the requirements for meeting EN ISO 17025 in the laboratory centre of the Bureau, as well as technical assistance for preparation for accession to EUROMET. 
G. Market surveillance 

How does your country ensure that products on the market throughout the country meet standard requirements? (Alternatively, do you have a reliable and standardised system of pre-marketing authorisation?) How is co-ordination ensured between sectors? How is market surveillance co-ordinated between market surveillance authorities and customs as regards product conformity and safety checks at external borders? What information exchange network exists between the various authorities? 
In the Republic of Macedonia there is an inherited network of laboratories, certification and inspection (control) authorities, whose status have  been identified according to the old legal framework and the old mechanism of approval, authorisation and accreditation. Product liability lies with the manufacturers prior to releasing them into circulation or utilizing them. Testing, certification, i.e. inspection (control) of the product is performed by adequate conformity authorities. This arises from the transitory provisions of the Law on Standardisation, the Law on Accreditation, the Metrology Law and the Law on Prescribing Technical Requirements for Products and Conformity Assessment (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 55/02), according to which the regulations laying down technical requirements for products, the procedure for assessing their conformity with technical requirements, product marking, as well as the necessary paperwork accompanying products, are carried out in accordance with the regulations adopted on the basis of the Law on Standardisation of 1995 (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 23/95). Coordination among market surveillance authorities (inspection services) is carried out pursuant to the Law on General Administrative Procedure, the Law on the Organisation and Work of State Administration Bodies (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 58/2000 and 44/2002), as well as the special laws of inspection bodies regulating the competencies of each state administration body. Prior to commencing the customs clearance procedure, the State Market Inspectorate carries out inspection supervision of goods (non-food products) regarding the declaration and instruction for use, which must  be in Macedonian and in Cyrillic letters on the original packaging, which does not exclude the possibility for simultaneous use of other languages and signs easily understandable for buyers, and it compiles a document (minutes) on the basis of which the competent customs authority carries out customs clearance for the goods. Information exchange among different competent authorities is carried out continuously and with permanent mutual contacts. 
H. International Agreements 

1. What mutual recognition or co-operation agreements in the field of standards, testing, certification and conformity assessment has your country signed? Do such agreements use international standards as a basis? Please provide translated copies (in English) of the relevant agreements. 
The Republic of Macedonia has agreements for mutual cooperation in the field of standardisation, metrology, accreditation and conformity assessment, as follows (copies of the agreements are attached):  1.  Agreement between the Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Macedonia and the State Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Croatia;  - see 01_Annex_012.  Agreement between the Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Yugoslavia;- see 01_Annex_023.  Agreement between the Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Macedonia and the State Committee of the Russian Federation on Standardisation, Metrology and Certification for Recognising the Results from the Examinations of Imported Goods; and – see 01_Annex_034.  Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine for cooperation in the field of mutual recognition of reports for establishing conformity assessment;-see 01_Annex_04Cooperation protocols and memoranda are, as follows: 1.  Memorandum of understanding between the Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Macedonia and the Netherlands Institute for Metrology 2.  Memorandum of understanding between the Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Macedonia and the UK National Weights and Measures Laboratory 3.  Memorandum of understanding between the Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Macedonia and the National Metrology Institute of the Republic of Turkey 4.  Memorandum of understanding between the Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Macedonia and the Czech Office for Standardisation, Metrology and Testing. – see 01_Annex_055.  Cooperation protocol between the Bureau of Standardisation and Metrology of the Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Bureau of Measures and Precious Metals of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
