II. CITIZEN'S RIGHTS 

1. Do EU citizens receive a different treatment than Macedonian citizens concerning access to education, including tuition fees? 
On the basis of Article 44 referred to in the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, education is accessible to anyone under equal conditions. The primary education is mandatory and free of charge.  Pursuant to Article 9 referred to in the Law on Primary Education of RM (consolidated text “Official Gazette of RM” No. 52/2002), primary education in the Republic of Macedonia may be acquired by foreign nationals and apatrides under the conditions laid down in this Law (the same regulation is valid for foreign nationals as for the domestic citizens).  Pursuant to Article 5 referred to in the Law on Secondary Education (Official Gazette of RM No. 52/2002, 40/2003, 42/2003, and 67/2004), foreign nationals and apatrides may acquire secondary education under the terms and conditions laid down in this Law (the same regulation is valid for foreign nationals as for the domestic citizens).  Article 6, paragraph 2 referred to in the Law on Higher Education (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 64/2000 and 49/2003) stipulates that all foreign nationals may, by application of the principle of reciprocity, be educated at the higher education institutions of the Republic of Macedonia under the same conditions as the citizens of the Republic of Macedonia.  Paragraph 3 stipulates that foreign nationals, with the exception of the persons referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article, may be educated at the higher education institutions.    Pursuant to paragraph 4, apatrides also have the right to higher education under the conditions laid down by law and under ratified international documents. Paragraph 5 is focused on the conditions from paragraphs 2, 3 referred to in this Article which are closely regulated by the university, or a higher educational institution, which is not included within the university.   There are two options for accommodation of foreigners as well as for domestic students: dormitory accommodation or private accommodation. According to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, 45/2002, and 49/2003) Article 20, paragraph 2, a foreigner who moves to RM for education or specialization, may submit a request before the expiry of the time for the permitted residence on the basis of the passport. The permit is issued for up to one year or until the expiry date of the passport. The possible extension is up to one year.  
2. Which legal procedures would be necessary to allow EU citizens to vote for and/or stand for the European Parliament or local elections in your country, or to benefit from other electoral rights? 
The Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia (Article 22) stipulates that every citizen who has reached the age of 18 acquires the right to vote.  This constitutional provision is implemented in:    The Law on Voters’ List (“Official Gazette of RM” No 42/02 and 35/04), Article 1 which regulates the method and procedure of voting right registration:    The Law on Election of the Members of the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia (“Official Gazette of RM” No 42/02 and 46/04): Articles 4 and 5 determine that every national of the Republic of Macedonia who has reached the age of 18 and has contractual capacity, has the right to elect, and the right to be elected member of the Parliament if he/she is 18 years of age, has contractual capacity, and is not serving a prison sentence for committing a crime:    Law on Local Elections (“Official Gazette of RM” No 45/04, consolidated text 52/04 and 60/04), Article 3 determines that every national of the Republic of Macedonia who has reached the age of 18 has the right to elect and be elected.  According to the above-mentioned, the legislation in the Republic of Macedonia does not allow for the persons who are not nationals of the Republic of Macedonia to take part in the voting; accordingly, the nationals of the member states of the European Union, do not have the right to vote in the Republic of Macedonia.  In order for individuals who are not nationals of the Republic of Macedonia to take part in the voting, the Constitution needs to be modified (for which a two third majority of the total number of MPs is required) followed by modification of the above-mentioned Laws.  
3. What documents must EU citizens not exercising an economic activity produce and what fee are they charged for a residence permit? 
Pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/2002) all foreigners, including the nationals of the member states of the EU, who are not involved in economic activity, and are willing to reside in Macedonia for a longer period of time (over three months, or if otherwise regulated by international agreement) are obliged to submit an application for a formal temporary residence permit.  The temporary residence may be approved only on the basis of the reasons for which the visa was previously issued by the Diplomatic Consular  Offices of the Republic of Macedonia abroad. The following documents are to be enclosed in the application for residence: a valid passport and a copy of the visa issued with noted activity, evidence on justified residence, evidence on provided supporting assets, and evidence on provided accommodation (written agreement for a flat, house, etc.).   Temporary residence is included in the foreigner’s passport in the form of a stamp and is issued for up to one year, or up to the expiry date of the passport if that period is shorter than one year.The residence may be extended if the application is submitted prior to the expiry of the temporary residence permit  and if the reasons are still justified.  The Law on Administrative Fees regulates the costs for acquiring a residence permit which are identical to the costs described in the following question number 4 included in this Chapter (02_II_4).  4. What documents must EU citizens who move to your country in order to study produce and what fee are they charged for a residence permit? 
All foreigners, as well as the nationals of the Member States of the European Union, prior to coming to the Republic of Macedonia for education, have to provide an appropriate visa in the Diplomatic Consular Offices of the Republic of Macedonia abroad. They have to submit an appropriate application form for an education-study visa written in Macedonian and English, or written in the official language of the state where the application is submitted. In this regard, the Diplomatic Consular Office requests approval from the Ministry of Interior and afterwards the Diplomatic Consular Office issues an entry-exit visa with noted activity.  After acquiring the visa and entering the Republic of Macedonia, the foreigner is obliged to submit to the competent organisational department of the Ministry of Interior of the Republic of Macedonia a request for permanent residence approval, which has to be submitted on a special application form written in Macedonian, English and French. Apart from the application form, the following documents must be enclosed:    Foreigner’s valid travel document    Confirmation that the foreigner is a pupil/full-time student on the appropriate school or faculty    Accommodation evidence    Provided supporting assets evidence  The Law on Administrative Fees ((“Official Gazette of RM” No. 17/93, 20/96, 7/98, 13/2001, 24/2003, and 19/2004) determines the amount of the taxes which foreigners shall pay to obtain a visa and a temporary residence permit. The applicant is also obliged to pay minimum tax for the request and to compensate the real costs of his/her request (forms, and etc,). The new draft Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners provides obtaining a permit for foreigner’s temporary residence in case of schooling- studying, if the foreigner encloses to the application the following documents: confirmation of his/her status as a secondary school student, or full-time student at an educational institution in the Republic of Macedonia where the foreigner is enrolled at and evidence that the foreigner is fluent in the language of the syllabus of the educational institution.   It is also provided that a foreigner who is moving to the Republic of Macedonia for cooperation, or participation in international exchange programmes of pupils and students, may be issued a permit if the foreigner submits a confirmation from a state body or an institution competent to carry out international or bilateral agreements on international exchange of pupils and students, where the time period of the cooperation or participation in the international exchange programme shall be determined.   In order to study in the Republic of Macedonia, a foreigner, younger than 18, in addition to the above-mentioned evidence, shall have to submit a verified approval from his/her parents or guardian.  
5. What are the reasons to refuse entry or residence to EU citizens? 
Pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (Official Gazette of RM No. 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/2002), the Republic of Macedonia makes no distinction between the foreigner from the EU member states or other states which are not EU members. A foreigner is a person who is not a national of the Republic of Macedonia.   The reasons for which the entry and residence shall be refused to a person – foreigner in the Republic of Macedonia are laid down in Article 17 referred to in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/2002), as follows:    To whom a expulsion from the Republic of Macedonia as security measure is pronounced or residence in the Republic of Macedonia is denied for the period for which the measure is adopted;    Who is registered in the records of the competent body as an international offender or for whom there is grounded suspicion that they enter RM in order to commit terrorist or other crime;    Whose residence in RM would present a financial burden for the state;   who does not possess the required entry visa for the state he/she travels to after the exit from the territory of the Republic of Macedonia;   who, in his/her request for issuing an entry visa for the territory of RM, has provided false data about himself/herself or about the purpose of the trip and residence, or has provided false identification papers;   Who does not possess documents to verify his/her identity;   Who comes from a region where infectious diseases are spread,and he/she does not possess vaccination proof.   
