III. FREE MOVEMENT OF WORKERS 
D. Articles 39, 43 and 49 EC Treaty 

1. What are the work permit requirements for EU migrant workers? 
The conditions for migrant workers from EU to acquire a work permit are laid down in the Law on Conditions for Employment of Foreign Nationals (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 12/93), and they are identical to those for emigrants from other foreign countries.  The work permit of the migrant workers is issued by the Employment Agency only if the migrant worker holds a temporary or permanent residence permit for the Republic of Macedonia.  The migrant worker who has obtained a permanent residence permit for the Republic of Macedonia is issued a work permit for the valid period of the permanent residence permit. The migrant worker who has a temporary residence permit is issued a work permit for a period no longer than the valid period of the temporary residence permit. Regarding competences of the Ministry of Interior, one of the conditions migrant workers from EU to be provided a work permit, pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, 45/2002, and 49/2003) is previously, after the completion of the procedure, provision-acquisition of an employment visa by the migrant worker from the Diplomatic Consular Offices of the Republic of Macedonia abroad.   The regulations do not make a distinction in the treatment of migrant workers whether they come from the EU member states or from other states.  
2. What provisions exist on non-discrimination on grounds of nationality (direct or indirect) against migrant workers in employment, pay and working conditions? 
The bases concerning ban on discrimination including ban on discrimination on the grounds of nationality are included in and guaranted by the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia. Pursuant to Article 32 referred to in the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia, every person has the right to employment, free choice of employment, protection at work and allowance in the course of the temporary unemployment.  The Labour Relations Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 80/2003) lays down the provisions regarding non-discrimination on different bases, including nationality covering emigrant workers in respect of employment, salaries and working conditions.   In this view, Article 9 referred to in the Labour Relations Law regulates the ban on direct or indirect discrimination regarding conditions of employment, promotion, insurance at work, working hours and termination of employment agreements due to the race, skin colour, gender, age, health condition, i.e. disability, religious, political or other affiliations, trade union membership, national or social background, family status, property condition, or other personal conditions. Men and women also must be provided equal opportunities and equal treatment regarding employment, promotion, work insurance, working conditions, working hours and termination of the employment agreements.  Pursuant to Article 77 referred to in the same Law, the employer is obliged to pay out equal salaries to the employees for equal work done and equal effort on the job regardless of the gender.  3. What nationality conditions (if any) apply to employment in the public sector? 
The general legislation for labour relations concerning public sectors, does not determine special conditions from the aspect of employment of foreign nationals, if not otherwise regulated by separate special regulations.  Pursuant to Article 9 referred to in the Law on Civil servants (“Official Gazette of RM”  No. 59/2000, 112/2000, 34/2001, 103/2001, 43/2002, 98/2002, 17/2003, 40/2003, 85/2003, 17/2004, and 69/2004), one of the conditions for a person to be employed as a civil servant is to be a national of the Republic of Macedonia.  
E. Abolition of restrictions on movement and residence within the Community for EU citizens exercising an economic activity either as salaried workers, self-employed or providers of services and their families (Directives 68/360/EEC and 73/148/EEC) 

1. What is the visa regime for EU migrant workers and their family members (including family members who are not EU nationals) entering the country? 
In the Articles 7 and 8 referred to in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners ((“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/02) it is provided that a foreigner is issued a visa for entrance, exit or transit through the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. The visa is issued for one, more or an unlimited number of journeys. The visa is issued for up to a one–year validation period or up to the expiry date of the travel document if that period is shorter than one year. For the nationals of the EU member states a visa is not required to enter the Republic of Macedonia, if, however, the purpose is to perform some economic or other activities, the visa is compulsory. The visa is issued on the request of the foreigner by the Diplomatic Consular Offices of the Republic of Macedonia abroad.   Thus, in Article 12 referred to in the same Law it is provided that for issuing a visa in the case of employment, specialisation, scientific research or performance of specific professional activity, the Diplomatic Consular Offices of the Republic of Macedonia requests approval from the Ministry of Interior. The Ministry of Interior, prior to providing the approval shall obtain an opinion from the body competent for the relevant business visa (for instance, in the case of employment, it shall obtain an opinion from the Ministry of Labour and Social Policy or the Employment Agency). Following the positive opinion (approval) from  the Ministry of Interior, the Diplomatic Consular Office shall issue a visa with a 30 day validation period, and the purpose, or the type of activity is noted on the visa form, (label), for instance ‘employment’, ‘professional activity’, and etc.  After entering in the Republic of Macedonia with that visa, the foreigner informs the Employment Agency which issues work permits. Then he/she submits an application to the Ministry of Interior whereby he/she is issued a temporary residence permit. The permit is issued in the form of a seal stamped in the foreigner’s travel document indicating the purpose or the type of business activity: ‘employment’, ‘professional activity’, etc.    Article 13 referred to in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners provides for issuing a business visa. A business visa may be issued to a foreigner for carrying out business provided for in the regulations of the Republic of Macedonia, referring to foreign investments and performance of foreign trade, and may be also issued to a foreigner who is performing expertise laid down in the Agreement on business-technical cooperation, long-term production cooperation, transfer of technology and foreign investments. The business visa may be also issued for intracorporative transfers, foreigner’s temporary transfers for commercial services in the Republic of Macedonia, who are leading managers or executives, or who have higher or deficit qualifications or education necessary for the functioning of the company in the Republic of Macedonia.   The business visa is issued for the validation period necessary to perform the work (from 90 days to 3 years with a possibility of extension), however, not longer than the expiry date of the travel document. In the course of the business visa validity period, the foreigner may enter and exit the Republic of Macedonia freely and an unlimited number of times.  The business visa may be issued by the Diplomatic Consular Offices of the Republic of Macedonia situated abrod and the Ministry of Interior according to the foreigner’s residence. However, due to practical reasons (the need for collection and inspection of the evidence), the business visa is issued by a local organisational department of the Ministry of Interior in the form of a seal, stamped in the foreigner’s travel document, and not as a label.  The business visa issued to a foreigner is considered as an approved temporary residence.  The members of a foreigner’s family from the EU member states do not need an entrance visa, but if the members of the family are not nationals of the EU member states, they need a common entry-exit visa if there is a visa regime with that country. After entering the Republic of Macedonia, on their request, they are approved a temporary residence on the basis of the temporary residence permit or the business visa of the foreigner-worker from the EU member states.   
2. What documents must EU citizens exercising an economic activity produce and what fee are they charged for a residence permit? 
Pursuant to the provisions referred to in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/02), nationals of the EU member states who are willing to perform a business in the Republic of Macedonia, are obliged to regulate their temporary residence on job base, or to obtain a business visa.   A foreigner, who is willing to regulate his/her temporary residence on the basis of a job, must be previously provided with an entry visa by the Diplomatic Consular Offices of the Republic of Macedonia for the purpose of working engagement (that is employment, professional business, specialisation, etc,). After entering the Republic of Macedonia, the foreigner is obliged to regulate his/her temporary job residence, in the competent local organisational department of the Ministry of Interior according to the place of residence.  The application to regulate the above-mentioned temporary residence should include:    Valid travel document;    Copy of the travel document with the entry visa;   Confirmation that the foreigner is a pupil/full-time student at the appropriate school or faculty;   Approval for justification of the residence (previously obtained approval by the Employment Agency, working agreement or confirmation from a legal or physical person where he/she will attend his/her specialization or training);   Accommodation proof (rent agreement);    Supporting assets proof (bank account certificate in the Republic of Macedonia or a foreign bank, certificate from the enterprise, or other legal person or body on the amount of salary or scholarship, etc.).  Pursuant to the Law on Administrative Fees (“Official Gazette of RM” No 17/93, 20/96, 7/98, 13/2001, 24/2003, and 19/2004) it is determined that a 3-month temporary residence administrative tax is in line with Tariff No 5.2 is 5 EUR, whereas over 3-month temporary residence is in line with Tariff No 5.3 is 10 EUR.   The foreigner having a temporary residence on job basis may be issued a foreigner ID-card as an identification document.   Pursuant to Article 13 referred to in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners, a foreigner may be also issued a business visa under conditions and terms discussed in the question no 75.  The Foreigner must enclose in his/her request:    Valid travel document;    Company registration proof, or service agreement (services on behalf of a foreign employer may be provided by a foreigner who is employed there, provided that there is a concluded service agreement with a legal or physical person performing business in the Republic of Macedonia);   Accommodation proof (rent agreement, and etc.);   Pursuant to the Law on Administrative Fees Tariff No 7, paragraph 2 item E, it is determined that the administrative tax for a business visa is 30 EUR.  
3. Are third country family members granted a residence permit of the same length of validity as the EU citizen? 
Pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/2002) there is no distinction between the nationals of the EU member states and those of the third countries. Foreigners are considered all persons who are not nationals of the Republic of Macedonia and accordingly all of them have equal rights.  Pursuant to Article 24 referred to in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners, members of the family of a foreign national who has obtained a temporary residence permit (both from EU and third countries), has also right to be approved residence in the Republic of Macedonia within the same time period and validity as the foreign national – holder of the residence permit.  
4. Can a migrant worker's residence permit be withdrawn solely on grounds of involuntary unemployment, illness or accident? 
The EU migrant worker’s residence permit shall be withdrawn in case of involuntary unemployment, if that was the reason for termination of employment. In cases of illness or accident at work, the EU migrant worker’s resident permit shall not be withdrawn, thus the foreigner will continue his/her residence in the Republic of Macedonia having the same status until the expiry of the residence permit.   If, the foreigner, as a result of the above-mentioned reasons, according to the legislation, has obtained certain social benefits, his/her residence may be continued until the time period he/she enjoys them.  
F. Freedom of movement for workers within the Community (Regulation (EEC) 1612/68) 

1. Do EU migrant workers have equal access to available employment? 
EU migrant workers have the same access to jobs on the labour market, i.e. they have the same opportunity for employment as the nationals of the Republic of Macedonia, under the conditions and terms laid down in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, 45/2002, and 49/2003), and pursuant to the Labour Relations Law of Foreign Nationals.  (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No 11/78 and 64/89, and “Official Gazette of  RM” No.12/93). 2. Are there any language requirements for specific jobs and if yes which ones? 
The Law on Protection of Children (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 98/2000, 17/2003, and 65/2004) determines that an employee in a public children institution may be a person who speaks fluent Macedonian and uses the Cyrillic alphabet. Pursuant to the Law on Primary Education (“Official Gazette of RM” No 44/95, 24/96, 34/96, 35/97, 82/99, 29/2002, 52/2002, 40/2003, 42/2003 and 63/2004) teachers, professionals and educators must be persons who, inter alia, speak Macedonian and use the Cyrillic alphabet.  The Law on Secondary Education (“Official Gazette of RM” 52/2002, 40/2003, 42/2003, and 67/2004) provides that teachers and educators should speak fluent Macedonian and use the alphabet in which the lecturing is delivered.  This Law provides that in private secondary schools where in some subject the teaching is delivered in a foreign language, teachers may also be foreign nationals who have completed a relevant type of education under the conditions laid down in the Law on Secondary Education.    
3. Do EU migrant workers receive assistance from employment offices? 
EU migrant workers exercise the right to mediate in employment, training, retraining, or post training due to employment, insurance in case of unemployment, through the Employment Agency, under the same conditions as the nationals of the Republic of Macedonia, if they have a permanent residence permit and a permit to employ foreign nationals, or permanent residence pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/02), which entered into force on 16 June 1992.     
4. What rights to "tax and social advantages" and vocational training do EU workers have? 
With regard to the taxes and social advetanges or the rights to undertake vocational training, EU workers have the same rights as the nationals of the Republic of Macedonia, if they have a legal residence permit in the Republic of Macedonia. In this view, the provisions referred to in the Personal Income Tax Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 80/93, 03/94, 70/94, 71/96, 28/97, 08/2001, 50/2001, 02/2002, and 44/2002), are equally applied for the EU workers, concerning salaries. Social advetanges in terms of the rights to social insurance are calculated in the same way as for Macedonian nationals.   
5. What trade union rights do EU workers have? 
Freedom of association is guaranteed pursuant to Article 20 referred to in the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia according to which the citizen is guaranteed a freedom of association in order to exercise and protect his/her political, economic, social, cultural and other rights and arrangements.   Accordingly, in order to exercise his/her economic and social rights regarding employment as laid down in the Collective Agreement, and Article 84 referred to in the Labor Relations Law (consolidated text, “Official Gazette of RM” No 80/2003) workers are entitled to establish trade unions. Membership and accession to the trade unions pursuant to the Law is free choice of workers.  
6. What housing rights do EU workers have? 
Foreign legal and natural persons, according to the existing legislation of the Republic of Macedonia, are entitled to rent and possess residential buildings.  Namelly, pursuant to Article 8 referred to in the Law on Housing (“Official Gazette of RM” No 21/98) – ‘A tenant may be a domestic or a foreign natural person as well as a domestic or a foreign legal person to house a natural person. (hereinafter: tenant)’  In line with the above–mentioned, the housing rights of all domestic and foreign natural and legal persons are equal regarding provision of rented flats.  Furtheron in the text of the Law on Housing, in Article 9 the procedure on provision of tenancy relation is clearly defined, i.e. ‘provisions referred to in the Law on Obligations are applied to the tenancy relations laid down in this Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 18/01).  The right to possess residential buildings is obtained pursuant to Article 244 paragraph 1 referred to in the Law on Ownership and Other Real Rights (“Official Gazette of RM” No.18/01) where ‘A foreign natural person may, UNDER RECIPROCITY CONDITIONS, obtain the right to ownership of a flat or a resident building in the Republic of Macedonia, as the nationals of the Republic of Macedonia’.  Thus the rights of foreign natural persons are equal (a foreign natural person, in line with this Law, is considered a natural person who does not have citizenship of the Republic of Macedonia, unless otherwise provided by the Law), with the rights of the nationals of the Republic of Macedonia regarding acquiring residential building ownership. 
7. Do EU migrant workers have the right to bring their family members (defined as spouse, children under 21 or dependant, and dependant relatives in the ascending line, all regardless of nationality) with them? 
Pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/2002) no distinction is made between the EU Member States nationals and those of the third countries. Foreigners are considered all persons who are not nationals of the Republic of Macedonia and all of them enjoy the same rights.  Pursuant to Article 24 referred to in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners, members of the foreign nationals’ family (migrant workers) both from the EU member states and third countries who have obtained a residence permit in the Republic of Macedonia, also have right to enter or right upon temporary residence approval, according to provided regulations  regardless of their nationality.  Members of the immediate family in view of this Law are considered spouses and children up to the age of 18.  Having regard to residence approval of ‘dependants’, pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners, there is a possibility of residence approval on the basis of ‘other justified reasons’, which is decided within a legal procedure for each single case on the request of the relevant person.  The length of the residence is determined accordingly to the length of the migrant worker’s residence permit or to the expiry date of the valid travel document if that period is shorter than the length of the migrant worker’s residence permit.   
8. Do the spouse and children under 21 of an EU migrant worker will have the right to employment in your country without a work permit? 
Pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Offical Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/2002), on the basis of reunion of a family, the spouse and the children under the age of 21 may obtain residence approval in the Republic of Macedonia.  With regard to the above-mentioned, the migrant worker’s spouse and children under the age of 21 from the EU Member State, may be employed in the Republic of Macedonia, if they have approval to establish a labour relation. The migrant worker’s spouse and children under the age of 21 from the EU Member States may be employed in the Republic of Macedonia without the approval to establish a labour relation, pursuant to the Law on Conditions for Establishing Labour Relation with Foreigners (“Official Gazette of SFRY” No 11/78 and 64/89), if the labour relation is established to perform expertise laid down in the agreements on business-technical cooperation, technology and foreign investment transfer and pursuant to the provisions referred to in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners, if he/she comes to the Republic of Macedonia to perform a business provided for in the regulations of the Republic of Macedonia referring to foreign investments and performance of foreign trade as well as in the cases laid down in Law.    
9. What rights to education do the children of EU migrant workers have? 
With regard to the exercising the right to primary, secondary, and higher education of the children of EU migrant workers, and pursuant to the Law on Primary Education (consolidated text “Offical Gazette of the RM” No. 52/2002), the Law on Secondary Education (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 52/2002, 40/2003, 42/2003, and 67/2004), foreign nationals and apatrides may obtain primary, secondary, and higher education under the conditions and terms laid down in these Laws.  To continue their education in the Republic of Macedonia, the children of EU migrant workers–students may request the Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Macedonia for nostrification and recognition of their certificates acquired abroad.  Pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, 45/2002, and 49/2003), children up to the age of 18, whose parent-guardian is a holder of a permanent permit or a temporary residence permit in the Republic of Macedonia, may be issued a residence or temporary residence permit. The children whose parents have already regulated their residence in the Republic of Macedonia, regardless of the category, have same residence rights as all foreigners, as well as the nationals of the EU Member States.  The new Draft Law on Foreigners regulates the importance of this issue and is in compliance with the standards of the European Union. This Law provides that the members, such as minor children of the foreigner’s immediate family, who is holds a residence permit, have the right to education. Minor children are considered those children of the foreigner or his/her spouse; including guardians and his/her spouse’s adopted children as well as the children of whom the guardian or his/her spouse have custody and who are under the age of 18.    The temporary residence permit is issued for up to one year, with a possible extension for the period of the foreigner’s (parent-guardian) permit.  G. Right to remain in the territory of the Member State after having been employed there (Regulation (EEC) 1251/70) or having pursued an activity in a self-employed capacity (Directive 75/34/CEE) 
1. What are the residence rights of the following categories of EU citizens: a) someone who has worked in your country for at least 12 months, and has lived there for at least 3 years, and then reaches retirement age; b) someone who has worked in your country for at least 2 years and then becomes incapable of work; c) someone who has worked in your country and then becomes incapable of work because of an accident at work or an occupational disease? 
a)  Pursuant to the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/2002), if the foreigner has had a temporary residence permit in the Republic of Macedonia and in the meantime has fulfilled pension conditions, he/she may continue his/her residence in the Republic of Macedonia if he/she submits a request for approval of his/her residence on another basis (retirement).  b)  In the view of residence, the foreigner may enjoy all his/her rights as the foreigner referred to in point a).  c)  In the view of residence, the foreigner may enjoy all his/her rights as the foreigner referred to in points a) and b).  2. What are the residence rights of the family members of EU citizens in the above categories? 
Pursuant to Article 24 referred to in the Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, and 45/2002) member of a foreign national’s family, who is a holder of a temporary residence permit, have also right to temporary residence (spouse and children under 18).  A foreigner, who has regulated such residence, has a right to reside in the Republic of Macedonia up to the expiry of the permit. Prior to the expiry of the valid permit, the foreigner is obliged to submit a request for extension to the competent body – local organisational department of the Ministry of Interior, which shall decide upon, depending on the status of the member of that foreigner’s family that he/she resides upon.   
H. Safeguarding the supplementary pension rights of employed and self-employed persons moving within the Community (Directive 98/49/EC) 

1. Does your country have any supplementary (or private) pension schemes? 
The multi-level pension system in the Republic of Macedonia also includes a supplementary capital funded pension system (third pillar). All individuals who are willing to obtain higher scope of material security than the compulsory insurance as well as all citizens who are not covered by the compulsory insurance, may involve in this type of insurance. Supplementary capital pension insurance will be closely regulated with a special law within the following years.   See more detailed information in Chapter II- Economic Criteria (II_VI_E_4.) 
2. What happens if a member of a supplementary pension scheme moves to an EU Member State? 
The rights emerging from the suplementary pension scheme will be closely regulated in the following years by a special law.  
3. Can payments from a supplementary pension scheme be made to a scheme member residing in an EU Member State? 
The rights emerging from the suplementary pension scheme will be closely regulated in the following years by a special law.  
4. Can workers who are temporarily posted from your country to an EU Member State continue to make contributions to their supplementary pension scheme? 
The rights emerging from the suplementary pension scheme will be closely regulated in the following years by a special law.  
5. Do supplementary pension schemes provide adequate information to members about their pension rights if they move to an EU Member State? 
The rights emerging from the suplementary pension scheme will be closely regulated in the following years by a special law.  