IV. CO-ORDINATION OF SOCIAL SECURITY SYSTEMS 
A. Scope of co-ordination(Ref. Council Regulation 1408/71 and 574/72):  
1. Personal scope: a) Does your social security legislation clearly define employed persons/self-employed persons and members of the family? 
Legislation of the Republic of Macedonia regarding individuals (personal scope) clearly defines the categories of employed/self-employed persons and members of their families.  This issue is completely regulated by the Labour Relations Law (Consolidated text, “Official Gazette of RM” No 80/2003).  In this respect we quote the definitions of employed persons and self-employed persons.  - Employed person The Labour Relations Law lays down the definition on employment: employment means a contracted relation between the employee and the employer regarding performance of certain work and exercise of the rights and duties.  A special definition regarding employed person has not been determined.  - Self-employed person  This person performs some of the independent businesses, in accordance with other special regulations on independent businesses, such as private health practice, law practice, notary public, art activities, and craft. These businesses are covered by tax and social security regulations.  Macedonian social security legislation (health, pension and disability insurance, employment) clearly defines the workers, the self-employed and other groups of insured persons as well as the members of their families.    From the point of view of pension and disability insurance:    Disability benefits: Law on Pension and Disability Insurance  (“Offical Gazette of the RM”  No 80/93, 3/94, 14/95, 71/96, 32/97, 24/00, 96/00, 5/01, 50/01 , 85/03, and 50/04) and regulations for its application;    Old age benefits: Law on Pension and Disability Insurance and regulations for its application;  Benefits for the family members: Law on Pension and Disability Insurance and regulations for its application;    Benefits in case of accidents at work and occupational disease: Law on Pension and Disability Insurance for regulating pension benefits as long-term benefits.  2. Material scope: a) Regulation 1408/71 will apply to the social security branches mentioned in Article 4: are all these branches covered by your legislation? b) As regards Article 5, can you list the legislation and social security schemes covered by the Regulation? c) Is there a clear distinction between social security benefits and social assistance as provided for by the Regulation?  d) Are there special schemes for war victims?  e) Please provide a list of your bilateral social security conventions. 
a)  Macedonian legislation on social insurance clearly defines the rights of workers, persons who perform independent business and other insured groups and members of their families. 

b) In line with Articles 4 and 5 referred to in the Regulation 1408/71, the following legislation on social insurance is covered by the Regulation: - Sickness and maternity: Law on Health Insurance (“Offical Gazette of RM” No 24/00, 34/00, 96/00, and 104/00);  - Disability benefits:  Law on Pension and Disability Insurance  (“Offical Gazette of RM”  No 80/93, 3/94, 14/95, 71/96, 32/97, 24/00, 96/00,  50/01, 85/03, and 50/04); - Old age benefits: Law on Pension and Disability Insurance  (“Offical Gazette of RM”  No 80/93, 3/94, 14/95, 71/96, 32/97, 24/00, 96/00, 50/01, 85/03, and 50/04) and the Law on Compulsory Capital Funded Pension Insurance (“Offical Gazette of RM” No 29/2002, 85/2003, and 40/04); - Benefits for the family members: Law on Pension and Disability Insurance Law on Pension and Disability Insurance  (“Offical Gazette of RM”  No 80/93, 3/94, 14/95, 71/96, 32/97, 24/00, 96/00, 50/01, 85/03, and 50/04);   - Benefits in the event of accidents at work and occupational disease: Law on Health Insurance and the Law on Pension and Disability Insurance ;  - Benefits in the event of death: on the basis of agreements of pension user associations, on the basis of the self-financing principle of pension users;    - Benefits in the event of unemployment: Labour Relations Law and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (“Offical Gazette of the RM” 37/97, 25/00,101/00, 50/01, 25/03, and 37/04).  

c)  Social security benefits in the Republic of Macedonia are regulated by the Law on Social Insurance and it includes persons who are not covered by the legislation quoted in b). In this respect, we consider that there is a clear distinction between the Social Security Programme and the Social Assistance Programme.     
d)  The benefits of the members of the security forces of the Republic of Macedonia and of disabled persons are regulated by the following Laws:    The Law on Exclusive Rights of the Members of the Security Forces of the Republic of Macedonia and the Members of their Families (“Offical Gazette of the RM”  No 2/2002, and 17/2003); and     Law on the Rights of the Disabled Veterans, Members of their Families and Members of the Fallen Warriors’ Families (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 13/96)  The Law on Exclusive Rights of the Members of the Security Forces of the Republic of Macedonia and the Members of their Families regulates the exclusive rights of the members of the security forces who were organised to take part in the defence of the independence, integrity and sovereignty of the territory of the Republic of Macedonia from January 1, 2000 as well as the members of their families.   The rights of the families of security forces members Members of a family of security forces member are considered: spouse, children and parents. The members of the families of a killed or dead  member of the security forces have the right to employment, housing (rented flat), a one-off financial compensation, rights in the area of education, preference when enrolling at state secondary schools and higher learning institutions without payment of the tuition fee, right to scholarship, free textbooks for the needs of the regular schooling in the primary and secondary state schools, participation in the pre-school institutions, scholarship and the right to family pension.     The right to a family pension is obtained in line with the regulations regarding pension and disability insurance, in the part concerning the fulfilment of the special conditions, and the amount of the family pension is established as favourable percentage amounting to 80% of the average salary in the Republic of Macedonia, on monthly basis.   The members of the families of the security forces, within the Ministry of Defence, victims in the wars of the former SFRY and disabled veterans benefit from these rights.  The rights of the members of the security forces:  A member of the security forces who was wounded or injured while defending the sovereignty of the Republic of Macedonia is exempt from personal payment when using health services. An unemployed member of the security forces has preference in employment in the state bodies, public enterprises and public institutions.  100% - 50% disabled veterans who do not possess their own flat or house, and do not use a rented flat in the ownership of the Republic of Macedonia, have the right to housing (rented flat).   
e)  The Republic of Macedonia has concluded and applies the bilateral social security conventions as follows:  1.  Social Security Convention between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Croatia, entered into force on 01.11.1997 (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 34/94);  2.  Social Security Convention between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Austria, entered into force on 01.04.1998 (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 28/92);   3.  Social Security Convention between the Republic of Macedonia and Turkey, entered into force on 01.07.2000 (“Official Gazette of RM” No 07/99);  4.  Social Security Convention between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Slovenia, entered into force on 01.04.2001 (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 13/99); 5.  Social Security Convention between the Republic of Macedonia and the Swiss Federation, entered into force on 01.01.2002 (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 44/00); 6.  Social Security Convention between the Republic of Macedonia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, entered into force on 01.04. 2002 (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 13/2002);  7.  Social Security Convention between the Republic of Macedonia and the Republic of Bulgaria, entered into force on 01.08.2003 (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 31/2003); 8.  The Social Security Convention between the Republic of Macedonia and Federal Republic of Germany (“Offical Gazette of the RM” No 70/30) shall enter into force 01.01. 2005.  Provided for by the Constitutional Law enforcing the Constitution, the Republic of Macedonia has undertaken and applied all international agreements concluded by former Yugoslavia in the field of social insurance. Agreements concluded between Former Yugoslavia: Belgium, former Czechoslovakia, Denmark, England and Northern Ireland, France, the Netherlands, Italy, Luxembourg, Hungary, Germany, Norway, Poland and Sweden.  B. The main principles of co-ordination: 
1. Equal treatment: a) Are there any examples in your social security legislation where non-nationals are treated less favourable than nationals?  
Regarding Macedonian legislation in the field of social security there are no examples of non-equal treatment of persons who are not Macedonian nationals. 
2. Determination of the applicable legislation: a) Are your social security schemes based on the principle of lex loci laboris or are they based on residence? b) Do you have rules and administrative structures applicable in the case of posting of workers? 

)  The social insurance schemes of the Republic of Macedonia are based on compulsory pension and disability insurance for the employed and the natural persons performing business, on the basis of the latest insurance.  
b)  There is legislation in the Republic of Macedonia, which is applied in case of posting workers abroad. Pursuant to the Labour Relations Law and Insurance in Case of Unemployment (“Official Gazette of RM” No  37/97, 25/00,101/00, 50/01,25/03  37/04), posting workers abroad is carried out by the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia and private employment mediation Agencies.  This Law specifically regulates the terms of posting of workers. In addition to this, posting workers abroad, according to the Law, may be done on the basis of bilateral agreement, or conventions, which regulates the terms and conditions of posting abroad.  So far, the Republic of Macedonia has concluded such agreement only with the Federal Republic of Germany, concluded in 1995, for posting workers employed in Macedonian construction firms to carry out construction agreements in FRG. This Treaty regulates posting terms and conditions.  Posting is carried out in the scope of the previously established annual quotas for detachment by the German party. 
3. Aggregation of periods: a) Do you have any experience with applying the principle of aggregation of periods in your relations with other countries? Which administrative structures are responsible for this? b) What are the waiting periods for entitlement to benefits equivalent to those covered by the scope of the EC Regulation? 


All agreements on social insurance concluded or undertaken between the foreign countries and the Republic of Macedonia anticipate aggregation of periods completed in the Republic of Macedonia and a foreign country.  The Pension and Disability Insurance Fund of the Republic of Macedonia is the carrier of the insurance and is liable and competent to carry out international agreements on social insurance.  Both the Health Insurance Fund of the Republic of Macedonia and the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia are competent to apply these agreements.  
b) All insured parties cannot exercise their rights to the equal amount regarding pension and disability insurance. The amount depends on the length of the service and salaries realised. These rights can be exercised, i.e. acquired from the day the conditions are fulfilled.    4. Export of benefits: a) Do you have any experience in applying the principle of export of benefits in your relations with other countries? Which administrative structures are responsible for this? Does your legislation include residence clauses? 
According to the Macedonian legislation regarding pension user, who is a foreign citizen moving to a permanent residence in the country whose national he/she is, his/her pension is paid out abroad if an international agreement has been concluded with the relevant country, or if there is reciprocity.  For the pension user – citizen of the Republic of Macedonia who is moving abroad, his/her pension and other money allowances are paid out if such obligation is provided for in the international agreements.  The Pension and Disability Insurance Fund of the Republic of Macedonia is responsible for the payment of the pensions abroad, which are paid out through the authorised banks.  In the Macedonian legislation there is Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners (“Official Gazette of RM” No 36/92, 66/92, 26/93, 45/2002), which regulates the questions regarding entrance, exit and residence of foreigners. There is a new draft Law on Movement and Residence of Foreigners. Apart from that, in the Macedonian legislation there is Labour Relations Law of Foreigners that shall also be amended with the new Labour Relations Law of Foreigners  
C. Co-ordination of different categories of benefits: 

1. Do you expect to encounter any difficulties in applying the provisions of the various chapters of the Regulation (sickness and maternity, invalidity, old age and death, unemployment, family benefits, etc.)? 
No particular difficulties regarding the application of Regulation 1408/71 are expected in the field of pension and disability insurance. An increased number of cases for exercising the rights to pension are expected as a result of concluding new agreements on social insurance with countries that the Republic of Macedonia has not concluded agreements with yet.  On the other hand, a complete security in achieving the rights of pension users may be expected as a result of the multilateral application of the principle of aggregation of insurance periods. 
D. Administrative capacity: 

1. Which administrative structures will be responsible for applying the co-ordination rules for the various chapters of the Regulation (sickness and maternity, invalidity, old-age and death, unemployment, family benefits, etc.)? 
The Pension and Disability Insurance Fund of the Republic of Macedonia, the Health Insurance Fund of the Republic of Macedonia and the Employment Agency of the Republic of Macedonia, shall be the competent Authorities to apply the principle of coordination of the Regulation1408/71.  