I. MUTUAL RECOGNITION OF PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS 
A. Training 

1. What is the duration and the content (curricula) of the training leading to access to the profession and/or the professional activities of doctor, nurse responsible for general care, dentist, midwife, veterinary surgeon, pharmacist and architect, given the requirements set out for the mentioned professions in the medical field and the criteria of articles 3 and 4 of the Architects Directive (Directive 85/384/EEC)? 
1. The studies at the Faculty of Medicine in Skopje last six years. After finishing the studies, the graduated students acquire the professional title Doctor of medical sciences. There are two study departments at this Faculty: Studies for General Medicine and Studies for Radiological Technologists.  At the end of the studies at the Faculty of Medicine in Skopje, the students take a vocational exam before the Examination Commission within the Scientific Teaching Council, which examines the student’s capabilities to recognize the main diseases and to direct the patients towards the most appropriate way of treatment and rehabilitation.  An on-the-job training period, after finishing the studies, supervised by a health worker in the primary health care last one year, with a possible employment during the course of this training period as a general practitioner, who, according to this condition, acquires the rights for independent work within the primary health care.  Having passed the state exam, the individuals acquire a license for independent work as general practitioners.  The general acts in this Faculty, passed by the Scientific Teaching Council of the Faculty anticipate the conditions and procedures regarding organisation of postgraduate vocational studies, specialised and sub-specialised studies. The postgraduate vocational studies (specialised studies) last 9 months and finish with the completion of a specialisation paper. The specialisation lasts from 3 to 6 years after completion of the specialisation paper. Sub-specialisation lasts 2 years at least. After their completion, the person acquires the professional degree Specialist, or Sub-specialist in the specialised area.   Having completed the postgraduate studies (2-year period duration) and Master paper defence, the person acquires the scientific degree Master of Medical Sciences.   Having completed PhD studies and PhD dissertation defence, the person acquires the scientific degree Doctor of Medical Sciences.  2. Higher professional personnel in the field of medicine such as nurses and midwifes are vocationally advanced at the Post Secondary Medical School in Bitola as well as at the Faculty of Medicine in Skopje.  Education of the profession – nurse, and the profession - midwifes starts at the Secondary Medical School having a 4-year period duration. At the Post Secondary Medical School in Bitola are anticipated: a three-year study programme, a general course, for the nurse profiles as well as a study programme for medical laboratory technicians and analyst profiles. After completion of the three-year studies, the students acquire a diploma for higher vocational education and the title in the relevant area. The Faculty of Medicine in Skopje organizes teaching in the area of higher vocational training within a period of 5 semesters of studies for professional medical technicians:  Anaesthesiologist  Transfusion technicians  Respiratory therapist As well as studies aimed for professional nurses:  Intensive care  Pediatrics  midwifes  Instrument technicians. 
3. The studies, or the courses of the vocational training, regarding profession or professional work of the doctors of dental medicine take place at the Faculty of Dental medicine in Skopje. There is an innovation within the dental medicine studies including the school year 2004/2005 regarding a five-year duration period (according to the old programme they were organized in 12 semesters).  The professional title that the student acquires after completing his/her studies is Graduated doctor of dental medicine. The graduated dental medicine students undertake a 6-month training period, after which a vocational exam is taken (theoretical and practical) before the Examination Commission. In order to acquire the License for independent performance of their practice, the individuals who fulfil the above-mentioned criteria are obliged to register within the dental medicine Chamber.  The vocational dental technician studies last for 6-semesters.   The specialization in the area of Dental medicine lasts for a 3-4 year period and is completed with a specialization paper worked out. Sub-specialization lasts for a 2-year period at least. After completion of those studies, the individuals acquire the professional degree Specialist, or Sub-specialist in a particular area of Dental medicine. The student, after completing his/her postgraduate studies (2-year period duration) and after the defence of the Master paper, acquires the science degree Master of dental medicine Sciences, and after the completion of PhD studies and the defence of PhD Dissertation, the person acquires the scientific degree PhD of Dental Medicine Sciences. 
4. The Studies at the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine in Skopje last five years. The professional title acquired after completion of the studies is Doctor of Veterinary Medicine.  The final exam at the end of the studies is a condition to acquire the professional title Doctor of Veterinary Medicine.  After finishing a one-year practice at the veterinary clinic, the persons are obliged to take the compulsory professional (state) exam. Thus the persons fulfil the condition and acquire the opportunity to be employed in the veterinary station as well as in the veterinary inspection.  All persons who have passed the professional exam and are employed in a veterinary station may be employed as a veterinary surgeons.  All persons, who have finished specialisation studies and have acquired the professional title Specialist in Veterinary Surgery, have the right to be professionally engaged.   The Faculty organizes scientific postgraduate studies (Master Studies) within a 4-semester period for acquiring the scientific degree Master (Master paper included), as well as postgraduate professional studies (specialization studies) within a three-semester period duration for acquiring the professional degree Specialist (specialist paper included). PhD studies organised by the Faculty last for two years at least and the doctoral dissertation is the final phase after which the person acquires the scientific degree PhD of Science in the relevant area.   The persons who have rounded their professional training in this area are entitled to, upon their admission in the registers of the Veterinary Chamber acquire a license for independent performance of their practice.   
5. The study programme at the Faculty of Pharmacy has been reorganized in semester subject teaching and has introduced the credit – system ECTS. After the successful defence of the graduation exam, the graduate students acquire the title Master of Pharmacy. The studies at the Faculty of Pharmacy last for 10-semesters and are organized on the base of the credit transfer system. 
Elective subjects Group A  1. Pharmacoeconomy 2. Pharmacoepidemiology 3.  Public Health  Group B  1.  Clinic Pharmacology  2. Phytotherapy 3. Biotechnology 4. Pharmacogenetics 5.  Knowledge of the foodstuffs  6. Ecology 7. Cosmetology The student may defend his/her graduation paper after achieving 290 CP in total. Thus, the student acquires diploma for completion of the Faculty of Pharmacy achieving the professional title Master of Pharmacy after 5-year studies. The curriculum and the teaching programmes enable the application of educational experiences in a range of areas, knowledge of the curative substances of natural or synthetic origin, knowledge of the mechanisms of action and formulation in doses, introduction to the forms of application, biotransformation of the drugs, adverse effects and toxicological aspects of drug intakes. The content of the curriculum is diverse and enables creation of staff for the needs of the pharmacological activity, pharmacological industry, and health services in the area of therapeutics, supply and distribution of drugs, laboratory activity as well as participation in the scientific work.   The Faculty of Pharmacy also organizes postgraduate upgrading, which enables creation of high level staff who can take part in scientific projects. In accordance with the Law on Health Care, the Faculty carries out specialization education and training of the health staff to work in particular areas within the health system.   
Institutes  
  Institute of Pharmacological Chemistry    Institute of Pharmacological Technology    Institute of Pharmacogenosy    Institute of Chemistry    Institute of Applied Biochemistry  
Other departments  
  National Centre for Providing Information on Drugs    Centre for Research and Control of Drugs  There is a compulsory 6-month internship in this area after the completion of the studies. In accordance with the Law on Health Care (“Official Gazette of RM” No 38/91, 46/93, 55/95, 41/2002 and 10/2004) after the expiration of the internship, the persons take a Vocational Exam before the Pharmacy Chamber thus acquiring the condition to obtain a license for independent work, or performance of their practice as well as registration in the Pharmacy Chamber.  Pursuant to Article 21, paragraph 2 referred to in the Law on Amending the Law on Health Care (“Official Gazette of RM” No 10/2004), the heath workers having higher education in the area of medicine and dental medicine may offer health care under supervision of a health worker having a job license, after having completed the on-the-job training period, having passed the vocational exam and having acquired a general license.    Paragraph 3 of the same Article provides that they may independently offer health care after having completed their internship, having passed the vocational exam, completed the specialisation, or sub-specialization and obtained the relevant job license.  The health workers who have completed higher education in the area of pharmacology may independently perform pharmacological practice after having completed their internship, having passed their vocational exam and having acquired a job license.  The curriculum and the programme are established by the Rulebook of the Plan and the Programme for the Health Workers’ Internship who have completed higher education as well as the form and manner of training book processing (“Official Gazette of RM” No 65/2004).  For the health workers, who have graduated from the Faculty of Medicine, their internship is anticipated to comprise: general medicine, internal medicine group, surgery group, care for women, children and youth group, preventive medicine and judicial medicine group.  For the health workers, who have graduated from the Faculty of Dental Medicine, it is anticipated their internship to comprise general dental medicine, dental and endodent diseases, oral and parident diseases, children’s and preventive dental medicine, oral surgery, maxillofacial surgery, jaw orthopaedics, dental medicine prosthetics, social medicine with organization of the health practice. For the health workers, who have graduated from the Faculty of Pharmacy  it is anticipated their internship to include: pharmacy, institutes or laboratories for pharmacological technology, research and control of drugs, medical biochemistry, sanitary chemistry, toxicological chemistry, medical herbs, pharmacological chemistry, pharmacology (pharmacology and pharmacodynamics), as well as social medicine and organization of health practice.   The above-mentioned refers to the health workers who have graduated from the Faculty of Medicine in line with the 5-year study programme.  For the health workers who have graduated from the Faculty in line with the 6-year study programme, it is anticipated that the internship last for 6 months and include:    for the physicians: primary health care, internal medical surgery, paediatrics, gynaecology and obstetrics     for the doctors of dental medicine: children’s and preventive dental medicine, fixed dental medicine, prosthetics, mobile dental medicine prosthetics, oral surgery, mouth and parident diseases, dental and edodent diseases.    for the graduated pharmacologists: pharmacy with galenic laboratory, hospital pharmacology; pharmaco-informatics and clinical pharmacology.  Pursuant to the Rulebook on internship and vocational exam of the health workers who have completed secondary and post secondary education (“Official Gazette of RM” No 65/2004), the internship for the health workers who have completed secondary vocational training lasts 6 months, and for the health workers who have completed post secondary education, it lasts 9 months.  The curriculum and the programme for the internship are established on the base of educational profile: (secondary education: nurse-technician, dental medicine nurse-technician, genecology-obstetric nurse-technician, medical laboratory technician, pharmacological laboratory technician, physiotherapeutic technician, dental technician and post secondary education – educational profiles: higher qualified nurse, higher qualified gynaecology-obstetric nurse-technician, higher qualified sanitary technician, higher qualified biochemical health laboratory technician, higher qualified pharmacology technician, higher qualified radiology technician, higher qualified dental medicine-prosthetic technician, higher qualified physiotherapeutic technician)  The job license for health workers who have completed higher education is issued by the Physician, Pharmacological and dental medicine Chamber for a 7-year period duration. A health worker, who has completed higher education, can renew their job license if in the course of the validity of his/her license they have gained a particular number of points, and if at least 60% of the time of the job license validation he/she has performed the practice he/she has had a license for by continuing professional upgrading through following the innovations in medicine, dental medicine and pharmacology, and through upgrading his/her knowledge. The Law on Health Care regulates the temporary or permanent suspension of the job license.  The job license may be temporarily suspended up to seven years, if the higher educated health worker:  1.  has not extended his/her job license within the time limit provided for in this Law;  2.  has not completed the additional training within the time limit;  3.  has not successfully completed the additional verification of the professional knowledge and skills; 4.  by a judicial order in effect, has been temporarily banned to perform his/her practice or profession;  5.  is determined, after being assigned the job license, to have obtained the approval for conditions in opposition to the Law; 6.  works out of the job license he/she possesses, or works in conditions he/she does not have permission for pursuant to this Law;  7.  is found guilty by the Court of Honour within a relevant Chamber of violating the Code of Medical Ethics. The job license may be permanently suspended if the judicial order in effect determines that the higher educated health worker has done a professional omission or a mistake in the course of his/her practice, thus causing permanent health disturbance or death of the patient.  The health workers who have completed secondary or post secondary education are not subjected to the license system.  
6. According to Articles 3 and 4 referred to in the Directive 85/384 EEC, vocational education of undergraduate study programme in the area of architecture lasts five (5) semesters at the Faculty of Architecture in Skopje and thus the person acquires the title engineer-architect. Achieving a balance between the theory and practice in this professional training throughout rounding the following courses, an affirmative enrichment of the subjects is achieved, such as:  1.  Elements of Design  2.  Architectural Constructions I  3.  Art expression  4.  Bases of Computer Technique  5. Mathematics 6.  Descriptive Geometry  7.  Philosophy of Technique  8. Defendology 9.  Bases of Design  10. Bases of Urban Planning  11. Architectural Constructions II  12. Plastic Shaping  13. Perspective  14. Architecture and Art of the Ancient Ages  15. Architecture and Art of the Middle Ages 16. Mechanics  17. Hardness of Materials 18. Architectural Physics  19. Organisation and Management  20. Architectural Design  21. Urban Design  22. Detail in Architecture  23. Technology of Construction with Terrain Teaching  24. Architectural-Urban Planning Regulation 25. Concrete and Reinforced Concrete  26. Applied Geodesy  27. Application of Computers – facultative course Pursuant to Articles 3 and 4 referred to in the Directive 85/384 EEC Vocational education of undergraduate study programme in the area of architecture lasts ten (10) semesters at the Faculty of Architecture in Skopje and thus the person acquires the professional title graduated engineer-architect, Achieving a balance between the theory and practice in this professional training throughout rounding the following courses, an affirmative enrichment is achieved of the subjects such as:   1.  Elements of Design  2.  Architectural Constructions I  3.  Art Expression  4.  Bases of the Computer Technique  5. Mathematics 6.  Descriptive Geometry  7.  Philosophy of Technique  8. Defendology 9.  Bases of Design  10. Bases of Urban Planning  11. Architectural Constructions II  12. Plastic Shaping  13. Perspective  14. Architecture and Art of the Ancient Ages 15. Architecture and Art of the Middle Ages 16. Mechanics  17. Hardness of Materials  18. Architectural Physics 19. Organisation and Management  20. Design of Residence Buildings  21. Urban Analyses, Planning, and Programming of City Functions   22. Structural Systems and Technologies  23. Architecture and Art of the New Age  24. Contemporary Architecture and Art  25. Architecture and Art in Macedonia  26. Statistics and Architectural Constructions   27. Wood Constructions  28. Steel Constructions 29. Design of Catering and Collective Accommodation Constructions    30. Design of Social Buildings I  31. Design of Economic Buildings  32. Methodology of Urban Planning  33. Urban Design and Reconstruction  34. Installations  35. Theory and Architectural Research  36. Concrete and Reinforced Concrete   37. Design of Social Building II  38. Design of Industrial Buildings  39. Interior Architecture   40. Optional Programme  41. Final Paper  42. Foreign Language  43. Sports Education  44. Computer Application  45. Modelling  46. Sketching 47. Art Photography  Internal scientific-teaching organisational units of the Faculty are as follows:  1.  Institute for Architectural Planning; 2.  Institute for Physical Planning of the Environment; 3.  Institute for History of Architecture and Art; 4.  Institute for Graphic Communication and Mathematics;  5.  Building Construction Institute.  Postgraduate studies at the Faculty are organized as science postgraduate studies ( the students acquire the scientific degree Master of Technical Science in the field of Architecture, or Master of Technical Science in the field of Urban Planning); as well as Art Studies (Master Studies) – 3 semesters (acquiring scientific degree Master of Art in the field of Architecture), and postgraduate professional studies (specialization) of 9-month period duration and thus the student who has completed these studies acquires the professional title Specialist in Architecture, or Specialist in Urban Planning.   The scientific degree PhD is acquired by: PhD studies completed, PhD dissertation worked out and defended; as well as a PhD dissertation signed up and worked out. The PhD studies last two years at least. The person who has completed his/her PhD studies and defended his/her PhD dissertation acquires the scientific degree PhD of Technical Sciences in the field of Architecture, and PhD of Technical Sciences in the field of Urban Planning.  To upgrade and deepen his/her completed undergraduate and postgraduate studies, the graduate may, within a specialized study programme, increase his/her qualification and acquire a new professional and scientific title of education, or new specialization, for which a diploma or associate document is issued. The Faculty may also establish other forms of knowledge deepening such as organization of an architecture summer school, summer camps and workshops as well as other activities. The Faculty may establish forms of continuous education through training, courses, seminars and other forms of continuous education.  Having passed the vocational-state exam, all persons who have completed higher education of this profile, acquire License for performing general and detailed urban planning. Having passed a 3-year working period in an institution for urban planning, they acquire the right to perform and design urban projects.  
2. Are the dental profession and the medical profession two legally distinct professions? 
The Dental profession and the Medical profession are two different professions from the following aspect: The Dental Medicine as a profession covers practices in the area of dental sciences and associated fundamental areas, as well as other areas connected with the main practice of Dental medicine. Education regarding this profession is focused on the following profiles: oral and paradent diseases, oral surgery, dental and endotent diseases, mobile dental medicine prosthetics, children and preventive dental medicine, orthodontia, and maxillofacial surgery.  The Medical profession is a highly professional health applicable practice covering medical sciences and associated fundamental areas; it performs fundamental medical practices; development and application activities and research; pre-clinical, clinical, social medical and preventive practices; practices in the area of pathological conditions and therapeutic protocols; organises forms and types of protection and improvement of the health, environment and working environment applying professional medical measures, activities and procedures.  Education regarding this profession is focused on the following areas: anatomy, medical physiology and anthropology, microbiology and parasithology, medical and experimental biochemistry, medical histology and embryology, pathologic anatomy, epidemiology and biostatistics with medical informatics, forensic medicine with criminology, pathological physiology and nuclear medicine, pre-clinical and clinical pharmacology with toxicology, immunobiology and human genetics, social medicine, labour medicine, radiology, radiotherapy and oncology, clinical biochemistry, heart diseases, nephrology, gastroenterohepatology, pulmology and allergology, endocrinology and diseases of metabolism, rheumatology, haematology, toxicology and urgent internal medicine, children diseases, infectious diseases and febrile conditions, dermal and venereal diseases, neurology, psychiatry, digestive surgery, thoracic and vascular surgery, urology, neurosurgery, traumatology, children surgery, plastic and reconstructive surgery, anesthesiology, reanimation, intensive treatment, orthopedic diseases, gynaecology and obstetrics, othorhinolaringology, ocular diseases, primary health care and public health.  3. Does the profession of midwife exist as a specific profession, legally distinct from nurses and doctors? 
Midwife is a special profession different from the profession of the nurse and doctor.  The midwife performs: normal spontaneous deliveries and is responsible for the care after the delivery.  The work of the doctor-midwife is similar, however, the doctor: diagnoses pregnancy, performs ultrasound-checks, induces delivery, and performs surgical deliveries and pelvis deliveries.  In respect of the education of the nurse/midwife profile, there are certain specifics: education of the nurses develops into two levels. The first level is the education at the secondary medical school, which follows the primary education (at the age of 14-15). This education lasts four years (IV degree of vocational training). The educational process is performed in line with the existing curriculum and syllabuses (this profile has not undergone reforms). The coverage of vocational subjects (9) and the educational-working practice, in which the individuals achieve knowledge and skills that are necessary for the performance of the working tasks provided for in this vocation, are the main condition for the individual to acquire the title nurse or nurse/midwife after completing the fourth degree of education.  The acquired educational profile is part of the health vocation, and this secondary vocational education includes:    Educational profile: gynaecology – obstetric nurse – technician;    Vocation: gynaecology – obstetric nurse. Such schools are located in Skopje, Tetovo, Bitola, Shtip, Prilep, and for midwifes in Skopje, Bitola, Shtip and Tetovo.  The second level includes education at the post secondary medical school, which lasts 2 years, or 4 semesters. However, with the Law on Higher Education these schools were closed and at the moment they operate as Faculties for nurses and midwifes and last 3 years or 6 semesters. These higher educational institutions offer only specialised education, as follows: professional nurse, instrument technician, nurse paediatrician, reanimation nurse, anaesthetist and midwifes.    There are two such higher educational institutions in Macedonia: the one is situated at the University of Bitola, and the other within the Faculty of Medicine in Skopje.  The Faculty of Medicine in Skopje offers study programmes of higher education for professional nurses, which are in line with study regulations of the European Credit Transfer System (ECTS), and the teaching is organized in modules (6 modules) and semester subjects. The studies last 6 semesters. After the completion of the studies, the individual acquires a diploma for higher education of professional nurse, and the title is determined by the module.    In the scope of Module B2, for instance, the following title is acquired:  Graduated Professional Medical Midwife The curriculum of this module covers 29 compulsory subjects and 2 elective subjects (from 4)  These schools do not include general education for nurses.  These schools, also, do not offer continuity in the education, thus the higher nurses, who have completed their education before this Law, cannot complete their education, because their previously passed exams are not acknowledged, whereas the new curricula are strictly vocational-medical, and there is no ‘health care’ as a subject, which, in fact, is the main working area of the nurses.    The characteristic of this profile is the obligation to take a vocational exam.  After the completion of their education there is a compulsory 6-month internship followed by a vocational exam before a Commission.  This Commission is established within the Faculty of Medicine, but so far  nurses has not been its members. According to the amendments to the Rulebook on internship and vocational exam of the health workers with secondary and post secondary education (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 65/2004), it is anticipated that the vocational exam be taken within the health institutions and a nurse or midwife be compulsorily included as a member. The internship as a precondition is still in force. Health workers who have completed secondary or post secondary education are not subject to the license system.  There is an Association of Nurses and Midwifes in RM with the following competences:    drafting regulations and standards;    a group for developing a syllabus for higher education for nurses and midwifes has been established in partnership with Slovenia (in line with EU criteria);   operate in line with the Code of Nurses and Midwifes;    translate literature;    organize various workshops and prepares nurse education;    a national group operates within the Association, proposed by the Ministry of Health, aimed to draft a National Strategy  A person may acquire the title Doctor-midwife after the completion of the studies at the Faculty of Medicine in Skopje (six-year period duration). After the completion of the studies, the graduated students acquire the professional title Graduated Doctor of Medicine. The specialization lasts 3-6 years and is carried out under the supervision of a mentor, eminent gynaecologist- midwife. It is completed by writing a specialization paper in the scope of that area. The sub-specialization lasts 2 years at least.  After their completion, the individual acquires the professional degree Specialist in Gynaecology and Obstetrics, or Sub-specialist in that area.  The job license for higher educated health workers is issued by the Medical Association of Macedonia, thus being trusted to perform their gynecologist-midwife practice independently.   
4. As regards other professions and/or professional activities, what are the requirements, if any, for access to and practice thereof, especially those concerning the duration and content (theoretical and practical) of training? 
With regard to other professions, the duration and content of the training (theoretical and practical) is regulated by the Labour Relations Laws, “Official Gazette of RM” No.  80/2003-consolidated text, and the Law on Civil servants, “Official Gazette of RM” No 59/2000, 112/2000, 34/2001, 103/2001, 43/2002, 17/2003, 40/2003, 85/2003, and 17/2004 The Labour Relations Laws (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 80/2003-consolidated text):  Any person, who fulfils the general conditions laid down in this Law and other law, and special conditions provided for in law, collective agreement and the employer’s act, may establish a labour relation.  A person over 15 years of age may establish a labour relation, but for underground work such as mining, the person must be over 18 years of age and in a good health condition. A disabled person who is qualified to perform particular work is considered to be in a good health condition for that work. A foreign national and an apatride may establish a labour relation under the conditions laid down in this Law, and other law.  The decision for the vacancy is brought by the employer, or the body assigned by him.  The employer is obliged to advertise the vacancy, the conditions to be fulfilled and the deadline of the selection.  Prior to the publication of the advertisement, the employer shall deliver to the competent employment service a registration for the vacancy.   The Law on Civil servants (“Official Gazette of RM” No 59/2000, 112/2000, 34/2001, 103/2001, 43/2002, 17/2003, 40/2003, 85/2003, and 17/2004):  Modality regarding the employment procedure through a public advertisement and vocational exam applies to the employees who have a status of probationer. Entrance in the public service as a probationer is provided for the employees with the lowest title from the second and third group (junior associate and junior officer). The vocational exam which is compulsory for other civil servants upon employment is not a condition when employing a probationer. These categories of employee-probationers verify their status of civil servants by taking the probationary exam.  The selection procedure of the successful candidates to take the jobs  in the civil service is of crucial importance for the functioning of the public service system.  In the Republic of Macedonia, the selection of the candidates in the civil service, is carried out pursuant to the Law on Civil servants in line with the merit system, thus preserving regular and efficient performance of the duties of the public bodies.  After the publication of the advertisement for the vacancy in the public service by the Civil Servants Agency, the general or state secretary, or the official of the body covered by the Law where general or state secretary is not appointed, shall establish an internal Commission to carry out the employment procedure.  The Commission comprises five members: the highest managerial civil servant – state/general secretary, two managerial civil servants, one expert civil servant from the body, and one representative from the Civil Servants Agency. By way of exception, an expert may be appointed as an external member of the Commission in line with the conditions necessary for the relevant position.   The candidates, who have applied for the advertisement and who fulfil the conditions (general and special, if anticipated for the relevant position), shall take the vocational exam in the Agency. Successful candidates for the positions of junior associate and junior officer who have the status of civil servants-probationers shall not take the exam.  On the basis of the results of the exam, the Agency shall prepare a list of five successful candidates who have passed the exam, which shall be communicated to the Commission.  In the case when fewer than five candidates have passed the exam, the Agency re-publishes the advertisement and re-administers the exam. If, after the repeated procedure, the Agency cannot compose a list of at least five successful candidates who have passed the exam, it can prepare a list of fewer than five candidates.   On the basis of the five-candidate list communicated by the Agency, the Commission prepares a shortlist of 3 candidates for each position. On the basis of this list, the general or state secretary, or the official of the body covered by the Law where the general, or state secretary is not appointed, shall select the successful person to be employed for the relevant position.   The unsuccessful candidate is entitled to appeal the decision to the Agency within 8 days from the day of the written selection announcement. The Agency must make a decision within 15 days from the day of the acceptance of the appeal. The appeal defers the execution of the selection decision of the candidate for a civil servant, or the successful candidate shall not be considered employed until it is settled.     The possibility to appeal, as well as the application of the two-level principle of the procedure guaranteed in our Constitution and in the civil servants employment procedure, is of great importance for the protection of the rights of unsuccessful candidates as well as for the functioning of the principle of equal access to public service positions.  Upon the end of the selection procedure, the general or state secretary shall make the decision to employ the civil servant.  In case of probationers employed as junior associates, and junior officers, who do not take the vocational exam, the Agency shall communicate to the Commission a list of the applicants. The general or state secretary shall decide on the selection of the successful candidate. Unsuccessful candidates are also entitled to appeal to the Agency.  After the selection, the employee has only a status of a civil servant-probationer. The training period regarding junior associate-probationers, who will have completed higher education, lasts one year, whereas the probationary period for the junior officers, who have completed post secondary or secondary education, lasts six months.   Civil servant-probationers shell be monitored and evaluated in the course of their training period in a manner established by the Civil Servants Agency. After the expiry of the trainee period, the probationer shall take the probationary exam before the Commission he/she was selected by. If the probationer passes the exam, he/she shall be employed on the vacant position. Conversely, he/she shall be dismissed.   The Agency is drafting a Programme both for probationer and vocational civil servants exam. It is obliged to organise and administer the vocational and probationary exam, and it establishes the criteria, standards and procedures on employment and selection of public servants referred to in the Rulebook.  One of the innovations within the employment procedure is taking and signing an oath.  There are particular specifics regarding the lawyer / public notary profession. After the completion of the 4-year studies at the Faculty of Law in Skopje, the students acquire the professional title Graduated lawyer.  In order to be registered in the BAR Association of the Republic of Macedonia and be entitled to undertake those professions, he/she has to fulfil the following conditions regarding his/her education, that is, to be a law graduate and to have passed the BAR exam. as a public service is achieved by free and independent legal practice, free choice of the lawyer, organisation of the lawyers within the BAR Association and its funding, autonomous acts adopted regarding the operation of the BAR  Association of the Republic of Macedonia and its bodies, as welll as registration in and deletion from the Directory of Lawyers, the Directory of Lawyer Associates, the Directory of Lawyer-probationers and adopting a Code of Ethics.   Thus in order to practice law after completing the law studies and acquiring a degree from the Faculty of Law, it is necessary to complete a two-year probationary period. This refers to a practical work in a lawyer’s office, where in the course of this two-year period the probationer achieves experience in legal presentation of parties before judicial and other state bodies. During that period, the probationers are registered in the Directory of Lawyer-probationers and the BAR  Association regulates their probationary period issues certificates allowing them to take the BAR  exam.   The BAR exam is taken before Commission established by the Ministry of Justice of the Republic of Macedonia. The exam criteria, method, and material are within the competence of the Ministry of Justice. In addition to the two-year probationary period certificated by the BAR  Association, the Ministry of Justice accepts a two-year trainee period served in companies, but only if the candidate has been involved in legal matter.  The successfully completed BAR exam is one of the criteria to work as a lawyer, as well as other professions such as judge or prosecutor. Therefore, for a person to become a lawyer it is necessary that they graduate from a Faculty of Law, serve two-year practical work and pass the BAR exam.  The BAR Association of the Republic of Macedonia takes into consideration and makes efforts to establish a special ‘BAR EXAMINATION’, which shall be taken before the bodies of the BAR Association, in particular, because previous practice pointed to the need for further more precise education of the students who have undertaken law. The reason, of course, is the wide range of legal areas they are involved in as well as their constitutional setting as a public service.   Consequently, a notary public must serve a 5-year internship to perform his/her profession after the completion of law studies and acquiring a diploma from the Faculty of Law. This refers to internship/practical work in the legal service.  The Ministry of Justice, if necessary, shall announce an advertisement for issuing a Certificate in a particular area within the Court of First Instance, where there is a need for a notary office and service. Selected persons, who have applied to the advertisement, shall take the Notary exam before the Commission established by the Ministry of Justice. After processing the documents and the results of the exam, the 7-member Commission within the Notary Association communicates its opinion to the Ministry of Justice.  Upon its decision, the Ministry shall issue a license to the successful candidate and shall adopt a Charter upon the decision. The person shall perform his/her notary practice within 1 month after the adoption of the decision and of the. At the beginning of the notary practice, the President of the Court of first instance is entitled to perform an inspection in order to determine if the practice conditions are fulfilled.       B. Practice of the profession/professional activity 

1. Which professions/professional activities (see article 1 (d) of Directive 89/48/EEC) are regulated by your legislation? What is the scope of the professional field of activities? 
The Republic of Macedonia adopted the National classification of occupations published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 16/2002 on the basis of ISCO/88 - the International Standard Classification of Occupations. Pursuant to the Macedonian legislation the following occupations stipulated in law are:   
NOTARY PUBLIC In accordance with the Notary Public Law published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 59/1996, the notary is an autonomous, independent public service, whose scope of work comprises activities of public competence on the basis of law and on requests by citizens, state bodies, legal entities and other interested institutions. The scope of work that may be performed by a notary public includes: birth certificates issuance, certificates, copies and extracts, confirmation of identification documents, taking identification documents, money and securities due to keeping and hand in, keeping of identification documents.  
ADVOCACY  Pursuant to the Advocacy Law published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 59/2002, advocacy is an autonomous and independent legal service, which solely provides legal assistance. Legal assistance includes providing of legal advice, representing in negotiations and provision of services in the area of business protocol, making up documents concerning legal deeds, writing writs regarding court and other procedures, representing parties before courts, state bodies and other legal entities, defending suspected persons and performing other practice with regard to legal advice.   
VETERINARY PROFESSION Pursuant to the Law on Veterinary Health published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 28/1998, the scope of the veterinary profession includes, as follows: animal health protection from diseases, protection from infectious diseases carried from animals to people, veterinary and sanitary check and control, veterinary protection and improvement of the environment and nature.   
MEDICAL PROFESSION The purpose of the medical profession is health protection of individuals, families and people, as well as undertaking measures, activities and procedures for protection and improvement of health and the environment. The medical profession is regulated by the Law on Health Protection published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 38/91. The medical profession covers the following professional practices: doctor of medicine profession, dental medicine profession, pharmaceutical profession and biochemical profession.    Performance of each of these professions is regulated by special secondary legislation – rulebooks developed thereof. In addition, the performance of this activity is regulated by relevant chamber statutes established within each profession.  
SOCIAL WORKER Pursuant to the Law on Social Protection published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 50/1997, as professional activities performed by social workers employed in the Social Work Centre are considered the following: uncovering, following and studying social occurrences and  matters; he/she applies and carries out suitable models of social protection and directly gives aid to citizens, families or a group of the population; facilitates and undertakes preventive activities to deter and eradicate the causes of the occurrences of the social risk state; develops and carries out extra-institutional social protection activities; facilitates, organises and coordinates voluntary activities of citizens, their associations, humanitarian organisations, organisations regarding implementation of social protection programmes in the municipality area; drafts social care plans and programmes; and performs other work stipulated in law.   
STOCKBROKERS Stockbrokers are authorised persons who work in brokerage firms, and have passed a special vocational exam to perform work connected with securities. Their scope of work includes securities trade in accordance with the Law on Securities, published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 63/2000. Apart from this, there are insurance brokers, who perform insurance brokerage work, and who have to obtain a license by the Minister of finance for this activity.. The license may be obtained upon taking a special exam for insurance brokers.   


ACTUARY An authorised actuary is a person holding a license for work as an authorised actuary issued by the Minister of finance. The Minister may authorise a body or legal entity as an authorised actuary. An autorised actuary controls the reconciliation of the data in annual accounts with the insurance accounting standards and the regularity of the yearly statements of account with regard to the building of technical reserves and other reserves within insurance companies in order to check whether premiums and technical reserves are accounted in line with the provisions of the Law on Insurance Supervision (“Official Gazette of RM” No 27/2002), which regulates this matter, and to find out whether they are calculated and separated in a way to enable long-term realisation of the liabilities arising from the claims agreed within the insurance contracts concluded in the insurance company.    
ATHLETES Athletes, pursuant to the Law on Sports published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 29/2002, are considered athletes of all ages taking part in sports activities and all participants in sports recreational activities. Professional athletes exercise all their rights and duties emerging from the labour relation within the sports club in a manner provided for in law and collective agreement.   
CRAFTSMEN Pursuant to the Law on Craft Activity published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 37/1998, craft activity means craft production, carrying out craft services, artistic craft and home handicraft. Craft activity may be also performed by a natural person whose work exceeds the volume of a small craft and who is registered in the craftsman registry. 
ARTISTS Pursuant to the Law on Culture published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 66/2003, an artist is any person who creates author’s work in the field of artistic creation or creates author’s work or popular art, regardless of his/her education, legal status, registration, citizenship or other affiliation. If the artist professionally performs his/her activity and if he/she is registered for performing art business, he/she acquires the status of independent artist.   
AUTHORISED AUDITORS  Only an authorised auditor, who is employed in an audit company, may carry out audit. Pursuant to the Law on Audit published in the “Official Gazette of RM” No 65/97, 27/2000, 31/2001, and 61/2002. Authorised auditors carry out the following work: inspection and evaluation of financial statements and accounting statements, as well as the date and methods applied in their realisation and provision of an independent and professional opinion whether those statements show the state of assets, capital, accounts receivable and accounts payable and the results of the entity operation being audited. In addition, the authorised auditor carries out inspection and evaluation of the operation, organisation of the business functioning, the manner of business decision making, the functioning of the information system within the entities being audited, as well as other issues of importance for their operation.   
2. How are these professions regulated: monopoly of activity? Protection of title? Affiliation to the social security system? Incompatibilities? 
Procedure for regulation of professions: Macedonian legislation recognises professions regulated by relevant law, as follows: notary public, lawyer, veterinarian, doctor of medicine, doctor of dental medicine, pharmacist, nurse, biochemical profession, social worker, stockbroker, insurance agent, actuary, athlete, craftsman, artist and authorised auditor. Relevant laws also regulate “professional recognition” as recognition of higher education qualification for the purpose of performing professional activity in the Republic of Macedonia. The medical profession is also regulated by secondary legislation adopted on the basis of relevant laws as well as by the status of the relevant chambers.  Monopoly of activity  Monopoly of activity exists in performing the notary public profession. Namely, pursuant to the Notary Public Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 59/96), the notary is organised on the basis of the territorial principle in the seats of the courts of first instance. The number of notaries public is limited, and it is determined by the Minister of justice upon opinion obtained from the local chamber. If in the area of the court of first instance reside over 20,000 inhabitants according to the latest official census, as a rule, this court shall have at least one notary public per 20,000 inhabitants.     There is no monopoly of activity regarding all other professions, except for medical professions (such as doctors, doctor of dental medicine and pharmacologists) and the veterinary profession, regarding possible self-employment, particular conditions provided by applicable regulations have to be fulfilled as well as a license obtained from the relevant Ministry.  
Protection of title In the scope of the separate laws, which regulate the aforementioned professions and their operation, punitive provisions are provided for protection against illegal deployment of a particular profession. Regarding professions where a natural person may perform the activities, the liability is on the natural person, whereas in cases of a profession performed by a legal person, the liability is on the legal person. The relevant chamber shall undertake measures for protection of titles.  
Affiliation to the social security system  All professions regulated by law are affiliated to the social security system such as all other professions. This can be discussed from two aspects: the first aspect refers to the performance of public service by a legal person, and the second is the performance of public service by a natural person. In both cases the persons that perform their professions enjoy their rights arising from the labour relation i.e. they have the right to health, pension and disability security. In both cases the persons also have the right to social care in case of unemployment or withdrawal from the function. Totally supported by the public interest, the state provides allowance for health security, pension and disability security for categorised athletes (having a status of leading athletes, unless secured on other basis), pursuant to the Law on Sport (“Official Gazette of RM” No 29/2002), which also refers to unaffiliated artists, who have obtained their status on the basis of  criteria in relevant procedure and a relevant act by the Minister of culture (pursuant to the Law on Culture, “Official Gazette of RM” No 66/2003). 
Incompatibility   Pursuant to the applicable legislation, in the Republic of Macedonia the persons who perform notary public activity, in accordance with law, must not perform other professional activities or public functions. Lawyers shall also forfeit the right to practice law if they establish a labour relation within another profession. Regarding all other professions provided in law, the persons, who are elected or nominated for a public function, must place his/her profession in a state of rest until discontinuation of the function.      
3. Which are the bodies overseeing the profession: professional orders, Ministries (which), other? 
Supervision over specific profession is initially done by the competent ministries, relevant chambers and inspectorates. For instance, supervision over health practice is initially done by the Ministry of Health through the Medical Association.  Supervision in the area of education is done by the Ministry of Education as well as by the Inspectorate of Education as a central educational institution in charge of observing the law in the area of education as well as of performing systematic control of the quality of the educational process.  
C. Administrative structures 
1. Please describe the administrative structures and related procedures for granting recognition of foreign professional qualifications in your country. 
This issue is regulated by the Law on Higher Education (“Official Gazette of RM”  No 64/2000, Articles 169-177) and the Law Amending the Law on Higher Education (“Official Gazette of RM” No 49/2003)- Articles 35 and 36.   Acknowledgment of foreign higher education qualifications is done by an Expert Commission for Acknowledgment, established by the scientific teaching council of a higher educational institution relevant for the scientific teaching area to be acknowledged.   After processing the documentation delivered to the Information Centre, the Expert Commission for Acknowledgment prepares an acknowledgment decision.  Implementation of the ratified bilateral agreements for mutual recognition of diplomas is done by the Ministry of Education and Science, under the conditions established in the bilateral agreement.   The Expert Commission for Verification is established upon the decision of the Minister of Education and Science, and includes professors from higher educational institutions in the Republic of Macedonia relevant for the scientific teaching area for recognition of foreign higher education qualifications, as well as experts from the ministry of Education and Science.  There is an Information Centre within the Ministry of Education and Science (Article 180 referred to in the Law on Higher Education), which is part of the Eurepean Network of Information Centres established by the Council of Europe and UNESCO. The Information Centre communicates to the expert commissions opinion on all aspects necessary to make a decision on recognition (Article 180-a referred to in the Law on Higher Education).  
