IV. INFORMATION SOCIETY SERVICES 
General – e-commerce 

1. Is there legislation or other requirements specific to the provision of information society services (defined as any service normally provided for remuneration, at a distance, by electronic means and at the individual request of a recipient of services)? If so, please give details. 
For the time being there is no particular legislation to regulate information society services. However some of the areas of providing information society services are regulated partially in certain laws. Namely, in line with Article 7 of the amendments to the existing Telecommunications Law (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 04/02) regarding services in the domain of information society which include information transport by telecommunications network by the service recipient or by providing access to the telecommunications network, the provider of transport and access to telecommunications network information society are not held responsible for the transported information, under the condition that the provider of transport and access to the telecommunications network:   has not initiated the transport;   has not selected the transported information recipient; and   has not selected or changed the information which information society transported. Providing transport and access stipulated in paragraph 1 of this Article include automatic, intermediary and transition period of storing transport information for the sole purpose of transport into the communications network, under the condition that it is not stored for longer than the reasonable transport period. According to Article 7-b, while providing services in the domain of information society which includes telecommunications network transport for service recipients and temporary information storage, performed for the sole purpose of efficient information transport to other service recipients upon their request, under the condition that the provider of the transport and access to telecommunications network:   does not change the information    acts in accordance with the conditions for access to information;   acts in accordance with the regulations for information update, determined in the manner broadly accepted and implemented in telecommunications activities;    does not violate the legal implementation of technology, broadly accepted and implemented in telecommunications, when receiving data for using the information;   acts immediately to eliminate and restrict the access to stored information upon being informed that the information in transport has been eliminated from the communications network or access to it has been restricted, or that a court or administrative body has ordered such elimination or restriction.  In line with Article 7-c, while providing services in the domain of information society which include storing information provided by the service recipient, the service provider of access and transport on the Telecommunications Network is not responsible for the information stored upon request of the service recipient, under the condition that the service provider of access and transport on the telecommunications network:   Is not informed about the illegal activity or information and, regarding requests for damage compensation, is not informed about the facts or conditions which render the illegal activity or information obvious; or   After receiving such knowledge or information acts immediately to eliminate or restrict access to information. Paragraph 1 of this Article does not apply when the service recipient acts under authority or control of the service provider for access and transport on the Telecommunications Network. In line with Article 7-d, services in the domain of information society can be provided for rapid information of relevant public institutions on alleged illegal activities undertaken, on information provided by the service recipients or obligations for transport of information which enable identification of service recipients of their information to relevant institutions upon their request and with which they have signed an agreement for storing.  The Draft Law on Electronic Communications, which information society currently in parliamentary procedure and prepared to terminate the implementation of the existing Telecommunications Law, will be based on five EU Directives:   Directive 2002/77/EU on market competitiveness of electronic communications networks and services;   Directive 2002/58/EU referring to personal data processing and protection of privacy in the sector of electronic communications;   Directive 2002/22/EU on the universal use and rights of service recipients in the field of electronic communications networks and services (Directive on Universal Services);   Directive 2002/20/EU on authorising electronic communications networks and services (Directive on Authorisation);   Directive 2002/19/EU on access and interconnection of electronic communications networks and additional facilities (Directive on Access). In this respect the Draft Law on Electronic Communications will include a separate chapter on secrecy and confidentiality protection in communication and provisions on protection measures for securing networks and services, communication confidentiality, identification of callers or connected lines, data on locating which are not transport data, legal interception of communications, automatic call redirection etc. It is expected that the Draft Law on Electronic Communications is adopted by the end of the first quarter of 2005.  The Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 34/01 and 06/02) regulates the electronic operations which include the use of information and communication technology, the use of electronic data, the use of electronic signature in courts, administrative procedures and payments.  The Law on Classified Information (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 09/04) regulates the classification of information, conditions, criteria, measures and activities undertaken for their protection, rights, obligations and responsibilities of the producers and users of classified information, international exchange and other issues related to the use of classified information. (Article 1) Under Article 2, the objective of this Law on Classified Information is to ensure the legal use of classified information and restrict any kind of illegal access to information. While according to Article 3, the Law is implemented for the protection of classified information received by foreign countries and international organisations or produced in mutual cooperation, unless otherwise regulated by ratified international agreements or international agreements accessed by the Republic of Macedonia.  The Law on Ratification of the Convention on Cybercrime (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 41/04), ratifies the Convention on Computer Crime adopted by the Council of Europe on 23 November 2001.  
Electronic pay-services (conditional access – Directive 98/84/EC) 

2. Has your country ratified Convention 185 of the Council of Europe on cybercrime? What kind of protection is currently provided to protect the remuneration of providers of services protected by conditional access? 
The Law on Ratifying the Convention on Computer Crime (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 41/04) ratifies the Convention on Computer Crime adopted by the Council of Europe on 23 November 2001. For the time being, there is no separate legislative instrument in the Republic of Macedonia that would regulate conditional subscriptions or contract-based subscriptions via a certain information technology security system (CAS – Conditional Access Systems) while services of information society are being provided.  
3.  Do you consider that this protection conforms to Directive 98/84/EC? 
This question cannot be answered because there is no regulation for the use of services through the CAS –Conditional Access Systems.  
Digital signature 

4. Have measures been taken to ensure the legality and recognition of digital signatures? Have measures been taken to ensure the legality and recognition of digital signatures? 
The issue of legality and recognition of digital signatures is regulated with the Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 34/01 and 06/02). Along with the adoption of this Law, 4 (four) out of the total of 7 (seven) secondary legislation items which regulate this sphere have been adopted:   Rulebook on the Contents and Rules on Issuance of Certificates    Rulebook on the Methods and Procedures for registering Certificate Issuers    Rulebook on Methods and Procedures for Accrediting Certificate Issuers and the Format and Shape of the Logo of Accredited Issuer   Rulebook on the Conditions to be met by Electronic Signature Instruments and the Control of Electronic Signature. The Rulebooks were published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 71/01. The Law entails (3) three more pieces of secondary legislation which have not been enacted. Two of them are still in draft version. They are secondary legislation acts arising from Articles 29, 30 and 31 of the Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature.  The Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature is harmonised with the EU Directive 1999/93/EC (Directive 1999/93/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 13 December 1999). With the adoption of the Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature, amendments and supplements have been made to a large number of laws where the term ‘electronic signature’ (according to the Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature) is equalised with the term ‘personal signature’.  
Supervisory authorities 

5. How do you ensure supervision in this area? 
In accordance with the Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 34/01 and 06/02) of the Ministry of Finance, an Accreditation Body needs to be established. It will do the registration of electronic signature and certificate issuers and keep a Register of electronic signatures and certificate issuers on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. The Electronic Register at the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Macedonia will be signed with a generally accepted electronic signature to be published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia.  The Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature regulates the protection of electronic certificate holders and undertakes measures in cases when the certificate issuer faces liquidation or bankruptcy, or incapability and obstruction to operate in compliance with the laws and secondary legislation and/or his own rules/policies.  For the time being, due to the partial implementation of the Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature, i.e. the lack of the last 3 (three) rulebooks (out of which 2 (two) are in draft version), the Accreditation Body has not been established yet.  The Ministry of Finance will take necessary steps to accelerate the process and prepare and adopt the last 3 (three) rulebooks and establish the Accreditation Body in accordance with the Law on Electronic Data and Electronic Signature. 
6. Has a contact point been appointed to co-operate with authorities in other European countries? 
In the process of implementing this project in the area of supervision, numerous contacts have been established with institutions in the European countries. Contacts and consultations were established with GCI (Government Centre for Informatics of the Republic of Slovenia). GCI is a certificate and electronic signature  issuer (SiGov and SiGen). The second institution for cooperation on information collection was D-TRUST GmbH (D-TRUST GmbH is a 100% subsidiary of Bundesdruckerei) which is also an electronic signature and certificate issuer in the Federal Republic of Germany.  The established contacts were aimed at collecting experience and providing necessary knowledge and building capacity from already experienced and active electronic signature and certificate issuers. Some of the most important information was the experience and problems faced in the implementation and operations as well as the platform used for issuing electronic signatures and certificates.  The contacts have been established with other countries as well, through seminars and workshops on electronic signature and certification.  
