III. PERSONAL DATA PROTECTION 
Legal framework 

1. Does existing legislation foresee sanctions in case of infringement of its provisions? 
In Chapter 7 of the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 12/94 and 04/02), the provisions regulating violations for non-compliance with the existing provisions and the fines for the violation determined as follows:   A fine of 20 to 35 salaries for violation performed by a data processing administrator if he/she: 1.  has collected, processed, kept, used and distributed personal data for which he was not authorised by law or by a written consent of the person to whom the data  pertains; 2.  has failed to identify and implement a regulation for the procedures and measures for safety of personal data;  3.  has revealed facts related to collecting, processing, keeping and distributing personal data to other legal or natural entities which are not authorised for performing such activities; 4.  has failed to delete from the data collection the personal data after they were collected, processed, kept and used in the necessary activity; 5.  has distributed personal data to an unauthorised user or has not kept an internal register on the distribution of personal data or submitted personal data of the client in a form which enabled the identification of the person’ identity; 6.  has failed to ensure that the data collection catalogue contains the data prescribed by the law or has failed to provide data required for the collective catalogue; 7.  has failed to enable the person or a proxy to review the data which refer to him/her and get a copy of the data from the collection; 8.  has failed to make additions, amendments and deletions of the data as advised by the person pointing to incorrect and out of date evidence; 9.  has failed to make changes of data for which the person has received instructions in writing; 10. has worked in contradiction to the provisions in this Law and transferred data out of the Republic of Macedonia.    A fine of two to five salaries is prescribed for the listed violations for the person responsible for the supervisor of the  data processing administrator.     A fine of five to ten salaries is prescribed for the listed violations for a self-employed person or professional, and a fine of one to two salaries for the listed violations for a natural entity.  In line with the aforementioned Law, a fine of 20 to 35 salaries is prescribed for the user of a data collection for distributing personal data which he/she received from the data collection manager, or they were used for purposes which are not in compliance with the Law.   A fine of two to five salaries is prescribed for the listed violations in line with the Law for the user, and a fine of five to ten salaries for the listed violations is prescribed for self-employed person or professional. A fine of one to two salaries for the listed violations is prescribed for a natural person.  In line with the provisions of the aforementioned Law, a fine of 20 to 35 salaries for a violation of a contracted service provider is prescribed if he/she has acted beyond the limits of his/her authorisations as initially allowed to by the customer, or has made unauthorised use of the data or transferred it to another entity.    A fine of two to five salaries for the listed violations is prescribed for the responsible person of the contracted service provider, and a fine of five to ten salaries for the listed violations is prescribed for the freelance individual.   A fine of one to two salaries is prescribed for the listed violations for a natural entity, the contractor of the service provider.  
2. How does existing legislation reconcile the right to privacy with the rules governing freedom of expression? 
The freedom of expression is guaranteed by the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia. Article 16 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia guarantees the freedom of personal conviction, conscience, thought and public expression of thought, as well as the freedom of speech, public address, public information and establishment of institutions for public information. This Article of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia guarantees the following: free access to information, freedom of reception and transmission of information, right to reply through the mass media, right to make a correction in the mass media, right to protect a source of information in the mass media, and prohibition of censorship.  On the basis of the aforementioned constitutional and legal guarantee, the Broadcasting Law has been adopted (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 20/97 and 70/03), which in compliance with Article 4, paragraph 1, anticipates that the broadcasting ensures the freedom of public expression of opinion, freedom of speech, public performance and public information.  The right to privacy of personal and family life and of dignity and repute, defined in Article 25 of the Constitution of the Republic of Macedonia is guaranteed with the provision of the Broadcasting Law.  Article 8, paragraph 1, line 12 stipulates that one of the principles which the broadcasting is based upon is “protection of the privacy and dignity of the personality".  Also, in accordance with Article 31, paragraph 2, line 2 pertaining to the content of broadcasting programmes, the following principle should be ensured through the broadcasting programmes – “respect of the freedom and rights of the human beings and citizens, their dignity and reputation”.  Articles 62 and 63 of the Broadcasting Law, pertaining to the right to give reply and make correction, provides for one of the mechanisms for protection of the privacy of the personality, by determining the fact that if a person “is concerned with the factual situation or presentation in the programmes on the radio or television, she/he has the right to give reply".  Broadcasting companies are obliged to broadcast the reply within the shortest period of time, i.e. in the subsequent edition of the same programme, free of charge, for the purpose of informing the public about the fact that the person presents regarding the disputed statement.  The same rule applies for publication of corrections to published information. 
3. Does existing legislation provide derogations to the prohibition of processing sensitive data where the processing of such data is required for the purposes of preventive medicine, medical diagnosis, or the management of health care services? 
The Law on Amending and Appending the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 04/02), stipulates that the processing of personal data relating to the race or other origin, political or religious conviction, membership in unions, sexual behaviour, conviction, as well as data on health condition, must be clearly marked and protected.  Taking into consideration the nature, i.e. the sensitivity of such data, it is determined that the same may be transferred through telecommunication network provided they are specially protected with cryptographic methods ensuring that they will not be legible during transfer.           In the light of incorporation of the provisions of the Directive of the European Parliament and European Council for Protection of Individuals in relation to processing of personal data and free circulation of such data 95/46/EC, in the part pertaining to special categories of personal data, in the Law on Personal Data Protection (adopted by the Parliament on 25 January 2005, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 07/05), the special categories of personal data are defined as personal data that reveal the race or national origin, political, religious or other conviction, membership in union, and data pertaining to health conditions or the sexual orientation.  Having in mind the sensitivity of the aforementioned category of personal data, the Law contains a prohibition for processing of special categories of personal data and determines in which cases, by derogation, the processing can be conducted of the aforementioned data. Among the eight clearly defined cases, it is stipulated that by derogation, the processing of special categories of personal data can be conducted if it is necessary for medical prevention, diagnostic purposes, medical treatment or management with public health institution, and if the processing is conducted by a person whose vocation is providing health protection under oath for confidentiality of data that he/she may acquire in performing his/her function.  The newly adopted legal provisions also provide an obligation that the processing of special categories of personal data to be clearly marked and protected, and the transfer through telecommunication network to be carried out only if the special categories of personal data are especially protected with cryptographic methods, ensuring that they will not be legible during the transfer.  The Law on Health Care (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos.38/91, 46/93, 55/95 and 10/04) strictly defines that in providing health care protection, health workers are obliged to take care of the beneficiaries of health services, to respect their dignity, to abide by the medical ethics and keep confidential the professional secrets.   Currently, a Draft Law on Protection of Mental Health is underway, the provisions of which will be harmonised with the provisions of the Law on Personal Data Protection, in particular in the part relating to the exception by derogation for processing of special personal data, if it necessary for medical prevention purposes, medical treatment or management of public health institution, and if the processing is conducted by a person whose vocation is providing health protection under oath for keeping confidential the data he/she has acquired during the performance of his/her functions.  4. How does existing legislation cover cross-border transfers of personal data? 
The existing legislation entirely regulates the question of cross-border personal data transfer. In the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 12/94 and 04/02), Chapter 5 titled ”Taking personal data out of the Republic of Macedonia” contains provisions which regulate the personal data transfer from the Republic of Macedonia to other countries. The existing Law provides that personal data transfer and distribution to users out of the Republic of Macedonia is not allowed, unless otherwise prescribed by the Law or based on a written consent by the personal data holder. While stipulating the provision in the mentioned Law, the importance of the reciprocity principle is emphasised as a relevant principle in the international law, as well as the role of the international agreements, treaties and conventions for scientific, commercial, technical, technology, cultural and other cooperation when transferring and distributing personal data to users out of the Republic of Macedonia. The possibility for a data manager to distribute data to users out of the Republic of Macedonia on the principle of reciprocity and based on international agreements, treaties and conventions for scientific, commercial, technical, technology, cultural and other cooperation is also regulated by the Law.  The sanctions for personal data transfer and distribution out of the Republic of Macedonia, which is in contradiction to the provisions in this Law, refer to the data collection manager who can be fined. The fine depends on the subject which has performed the violation. With an intention to transpose entirely the provisions in the EU Directive 95/46/ of 1995 on the protection of individuals regarding personal data processing and free data circulation, particularly regarding the part referring to the personal data transfer to third countries, is provided in the newly adopted Law on Personal Data Protection (adopted by the Parliament on 25 January 2005, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 07/05).  The newly adopted Law recommends a regulatory distinction of two separate chapters: personal data transfer to other countries and distributing personal data. Chapter 7, on the personal data transfer to other countries prescribes that personal data transfer to other countries may be performed only under the condition that the other country ensures a certain degree of personal data protection. An individual provision in the Law lists the conditions which are assessed by the Directorate for Personal Data Protection for personal data transfer to other countries. Namely, all conditions in which the personal data transfer to another country is performed affect the assessment of the degree of the appropriate personal data protection in the country of destination. In this respect, while assessing the degree of adequacy of personal data protection, there is individual observation of every condition related to the operation(s) of personal data transfer, personal data nature and origin, the objectives and length of processing operations, the country of personal data destination, the legislation regulating personal data protection in that particular country and the regulations referring to profession rules and safety measures.  The adequacy degree for personal data protection of another country is assessed by the Directorate.  In line with the mentioned Law, the Directorate will not allow for the personal data transfer unless the country of personal data destination ensures the necessary level of personal data protection.  The proposed Law regulates the possibilities for personal data transfer to other countries and the cases when the country of destination does not ensure the appropriate degree of personal data protection with the exclusion when:   the personal data holder has declaratively agreed to the transfer of his/her personal data;   the transfer is necessary for implementing an agreement between the personal data holder and the Controller or when pre-agreement measures are implemented and undertaken as a response to the requirement of the personal data holder;   the transfer is required for signing or implementing an agreement in the interest of the personal data holder between the Controller and a third party;   the transfer is necessary for public interest protection or basic freedom and civil rights protection; and   the transfer is necessary for the protection of the life or physical and moral integrity of the personal data holder. In cases when the destination country of the personal data transfer does not ensure the appropriate degree of data protection, the Directorate may allow for the personal data transfer if the Controller points to the existence of certain guarantees for the protection of privacy, essential rights and freedoms of the personal data holder, which entail from valid agreement provisions.  Chapter 8 titled “Providing personal data to users” includes provisions which normatively and legally regulate the use of personal data by domestic users, as well as exchange of personal data among state bodies. It is stipulated that the Controller will allow for another user to use personal data based on a submitted written request by the user, in cases when the data is necessary for performing activities within the legally identified responsibilities of the user. There is also a provision on prohibiting the allowance of personal data use if the use cannot be done in compliance with the provisions of this Law and if the purpose of the personal data use is in contradiction with the concrete, clear and regulated purposes for which personal data is collected.  The Directorate for Personal Data Protection is an independent body which performs supervision of compliance with law in undertaking activities for personal data processing and protection and registers each personal data transfer to another country. The secondary legislation which will regulate the form, contents and procedure of keeping the register of personal data transfer to other countries will be adopted within six months from its establishment.  Administrative capacity 

1. Is there a Supervisory Authority responsible for monitoring the application of Data Protection provisions? If so, please provide information on the organisation of the Authority, including the number of its staff, notably of inspectors. 
Pursuant to the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos.12/94 and 04/02), supervision over the legality of collection, processing, keeping, use and delivery of personal data in the Republic Macedonia is performed by an authority defined by law that determines the database.  The same authority supervises the process of taking personal data outside of the Republic of Macedonia. As of the entry into force of this Law, such a body has not been established yet.  In the light of full transposition of the Directive of the European Parliament and European Council for Protection of Individuals in relation to processing of personal data and free circulation of such data 95/46/EC, it has been transposed in the new text of the Law on Personal Data Protection (adopted by the Parliament on 25 January 2005, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 07/05).  The newly adopted Law contains a special Chapter "Establishment and Duties of the Directorate for Protection of Personal Data”. The provision provides for the establishment of the Directorate as an independent state body in the capacity of a legal entity that supervises the legality of undertaken activities in processing of personal data.  The Directorate is managed by a Director, who is appointed for a period of five years with a right to be re-elected for two consecutive terms and dismissed by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia upon the proposal of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia . The Director must be a person who meets the following criteria:  to be a citizen of the Republic of Macedonia, to be a respected lawyer and not subject to a safety measure – injunction on performance of  his/her professional activity or duty . The function of a Director is not compatible with the performance of other public functions or activities.  The director shall be independent and autonomous in performing his/her function.  The Director shall submit to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia the annual report on operations of the Agency.  The Law lays down the principles and duties of the Director and employees in the Directorate to keep the data they gained knowledge of during their work as official secrets, both, during mandate, i.e. employment in the Directorate, and after the end of mandate.  Thus, the Law entirely implements the basic principle of the Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and European Council relating to supervision of legality of processing of personal data by an independent body.  Grounds for implementation of the new Law will be the establishment of the aforementioned independent body within six months upon its entry into force.   The acts for organisation and systematisation of positions in the Directorate are planned to be adopted within thirty days following the appointment of a Director of the Directorate, and the adoption thereof will contribute to the shaping of the organisation and staffing, i.e. the number of employees in this body.   
2. Does the supervisory Authority have investigative powers, such as powers of access to data forming the subject of processing operations and powers to collect all the information necessary for the performance of its supervisory duties? 
In line with the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 12/94 and 04/02), the management body is in charge of the operations related to the personal data information technology and information system of the Republic of Macedonia and has the responsibility to supervise the implementation of organisational and technological procedures and measures of personal data protection and maintaining data collection catalogues.  However, since the day of enactment of this Law, such a body has not been established, which is one of the main impediments in the implementation of this Law.  The mentioned Law provides that in conducting inspection the inspector in-charge is obliged to:    inspect all acts which regulate personal data protection;   inspect the contents of the personal data catalogue;   inspect the premises in which personal data are collected, processed, stored, used and distributed including the computers and other equipment, and   inspect the functioning of the measures for personal data protection and their execution.  The inspector is obliged to regard the personal data that he/she has collected in the inspection process as professional, state and military secrets… The responsible inspector is authorised to decide on the following: 1.  Undertake measures for eliminating irregularities determined in implementing provisions of this Law related to the implementation of the organisation and technology procedures and measures, as well as to obligation to maintain personal collection catalogues; 2.  Prohibit the collection, processing, storing, distribution and use of personal data collections, or their deletion, if their complete protection is not ensured or the provisions for undertaking organisation and technology measures provided in this Law are not implemented accordingly. In the newly adopted Law on Personal Data Protection (adopted by the Parliament on 25 January 2005, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 07/05), there is a separate Chapter 9 entitled “Establishment and Assignments of the Directorate for Personal Data Protection”, legal provisions are recommended to establish the Directorate as an independent state body having the status of a legal entity which supervises the legality of the undertaken activities of personal data processing and protection. The Directorate is managed by a director appointed and dismissed by the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia upon recommendation of the Government of the Republic of Macedonia for the period of five years, who can be re-elected, not more than twice. A person can be appointed Director under the following conditions: he/she must be a citizen of the Republic of Macedonia, an outstanding lawyer, and not be subject to safety measures which prohibit activities in his/her profession, activity or duty. The position of Director is incompatible with other public functions or professions. The Director is independent and autonomous in performing his/her function. The Director submits an annual report on the work of the Directorate to the Assembly of the Republic of Macedonia. The proposed Law regulates the responsibility of the Directorate’s Director and employees related to the requirement that they regard the data which they have come across in their work during their terms in office, as well as after them, as professional secrets Aiming at regular and efficient performance of the work in the Directorate, the proposal for adopting a new Law on Personal Data Protection includes provisions which require that the Personal Data Protection Directorate’s Director and employees are allowed to:     enter any premises where the registered personal data collection system is processed, after the presentation of a document of official identification by a proxy and review the personal data collection;   request a written or oral explanation and summon and investigate individuals related to the personal data collection which is being inspected;    request presentation of documentation and other data related to the subject of control;   inspect the equipment used for personal data processing and preserving, and     order an expert analysis and opinion related to the work of the Controller. After the performed control the minutes are prepared. In line with newly adopted Law, a copy of the minutes is submitted to the Controller who was subject of control. In cases when the Controller refuses to sign the minutes, the Directorate’s employee notes this down in the minutes and within 7 days of the last day of inspection, submits his/her notes on the performed inspection in writing to the Director. In cases when actions in breach of this Law have been identified related to personal data processing, the employee who has performed the inspection informs the Director to initiate further proceedings. If the performed inspection determines violations of the provisions in this Law, the Controller is required, within 30 days from the day when the violation has been identified, to bring its work in compliance with the provisions of this Law, and in particular:   eliminate the reasons behind it;   complete, update, correct, discover and keep the confidentiality of  personal data;   undertake additional measures of personal data protection;   prevent the personal data transfer to other countries;   ensure the data and their transfer to other subjects; and   delete personal data.  When he/she has eliminated the irregularities, the Controller may require from the Directorate a fresh review of his/her case. An administrative dispute can also be initiated against the Directorate.  
3. Does the Supervisory Authority have effective powers of intervention such as the following: a) delivering opinions before data processing operations are carried out? b) ordering the blocking, erasure or destruction of data? c) imposing a temporary or definitive ban on processing? d) imposing sanctions on controllers? 
a) The government body responsible for the information system operations in the Republic of Macedonia, i.e. the supervisory body which performs supervision of the implementation of organisational and technological procedures and measures for personal data protection and catalogue, is in charge of giving opinion on the procedure of personal data processing.  Besides the supervision body, the supervision of the legal personal database, processing, storing, using and distribution in the Republic of Macedonia is performed by the body specified in the Law which sets out the procedures of personal database. However, this body is not authorised to give opinion prior to the performed procedure of personal data processing, in line with the provisions in the existing Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 12/94 and 04/02). However, in line with the existing legislation, an obligation is provided for the database operator to deliver data to the administrative body responsible for information technology and system in the Republic of Macedonia, within 15 days from the establishment of the collection, i.e. 15 days after the change of data in the catalogue.  A particular provision in the Law provides information which the database operator is obliged to submit to the supervision body. Namely, the database operator provides information on the:   Name of database;   Name and seat of the database operator   name and surname of the responsible person;   categories of personal data holders;   database  description;  database procedure;  collection purpose;  collection duration;   restrictions of the rights of legal entities regarding the data in the collection and legal grounds for restriction;   name and address of collection users in the country and abroad and legal ground for its use; and    name and address of the permanent contracted operator. Having in mind the contents in Article 18 of Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and the European Council, i.e. the obligation of the Controller or his/her representative to inform the supervisory body prior to performing any operation of complete or partial automated processing, or a sequence of the listed operations intended to achieve one or several related aims, the new Law on Personal Data Protection (adopted by the Parliament on 25 January 2005, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 07/05) regulates a similar obligation for each Controller.  The new Law regulates the obligation of the Controller to submit information to the Directorate of Personal Data Protection as a supervisory body, prior to performing an operation of a complete or partial automated personal data processing, and the processing aims to achieve one or several related goals. The information is required to include the following data: 1.  Name or personal name of the Collection Controller and seat; 2.  Aim or aims of processing; 3.  Category(s) of personal data holders and categories of personal data related to him/her; 4.  Users or categories of users allowed to use the personal data; 5.  Personal data transfer to other countries; and  6.  Description of undertaken measures for personal data protection. In line with the new  Law, the Controller is not obliged to submit information to the Directorate on already established personal databases equivalent to the processing aim, processed data and data category, subject to personal data category users or user categories to which data will be revealed as well as the period for which the date will be stored are determined by law.  The obligation to inform the Directorate also applies to every change of data which is included in the information. Also, in line with the new Law, the Controller is obliged to submit the data on the newly established personal database and the change of personal data in the existing collections within 15 days of the day of establishment or change to the Directorate of Personal Data Protection. Based on the information from the Controller and prior to performing an operation of personal data protection, the Directorate is obliged to grant opinion on whether certain personal data protection operations present a particular risk for the freedom and rights of the personal data holder. In cases of suspicion over the existence of a particular risk for the freedom and rights of the personal data holder, the Controller is obliged to request an opinion from the Directorate. 
b)  The existing Law on Personal Data Protection provides that personal data storage and use terminate when the need for which they were collected, processed and stored ceases or when the legal period for which the collection was established ends, and as soon as this happens, the personal data are deleted from the collection, unless otherwise provided by law.  The inspector in charge of performing inspection is entitled to prohibit the personal database, processing, storing, distribution and use of collections, i.e. their deletion if their complete protection is not ensured or if the provisions and procedures are not properly implemented by the database manager for undertaking organisational and technological procedures and measure.  The existing law provides that the person is entitled, upon his/her personal or his/her proxy’s written request, to demand from the database manager to amend, correct or delete the data which the person can prove to be incomplete, incorrect or out of date.  The database manager is obliged to add, correct and delete data within 15 days of the day that he/she has received the request, i.e. has an obligation to inform the person on the reasons behind this.  In line with the new Law on Personal Data Protection (adopted by the Parliament on 25 January 2005, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 07/05), upon request by the personal data holder, the Controller is obliged to add, change, delete or prevent from use the personal data if they are incomplete, incorrect and not updated and if their processing is not in compliance with the provisions in this Law. In cases when the Controller determines that the personal data are incomplete, incorrect and out of date, he/she is obliged to make the additions  or changes regardless if the personal data holder has submitted or not for additions or changes in the personal data. The Controller is obliged to inform the personal data holder, the personal data users and third parties who have been given the personal data, about the performed additions or changes within 30 days, unless this is impossible to do.  The newly adopted Law on Personal Data Protection provides that the Directorate of Personal Data Protection intervenes in the procedure of personal data processing, archiving, deleting and annulling the established personal database completely or partially if there is a justified risk of violating the rights of one or more personal data subjects, by assessing the type of personal data or the modalities of their processing.  The newly adopted Law provides the right to any natural entity who believes that his/her legally guaranteed right has been violated to submit a request for determining the violation of the right to the Commission within the Directorate of Personal Data Protection. Acting in response to the aforementioned request filed by the natural entity, the Commission at the Directorate of Personal Data Protection may issue a temporary decision for prohibiting the further personal data processing related to the request, until the procedure has been resolved accordingly.  The Directorate controls all cases of personal data processing termination regardless of the underlying reasons.  
c)  The existing Law provides that the inspector in charge of performing supervision is authorised to reach a decision on prohibiting the collection, processing, storing, distribution and use of personal data from the collection, i.e. their deletion if their complete protection is not ensured or if the provisions and procedures related to undertaking organisation and technology procedures and measures are not implemented accordingly.  The decision may be appealed against within eight days from the day the decision was served. The appeal is submitted with the Minister in charge of the administration body responsible for information technology and system operations of the Republic of Macedonia, who is obliged to reach a decision within 15 days from the day of the complaint delivery.  The newly adopted Law on Personal Data Protection, which is in progress, regulates the right of every natural entity who believes that his/her legally guaranteed right is violated.  He/she may submit a request for determining the possible extent of violation to the Commission at the Directorate of Personal Data Protection. Acting on the aforementioned request by the natural entity, the Commission at the Directorate of Personal Data Protection can make a temporary decision for prohibiting further personal data processing until the procedure has ended.  The newly adopted Law on Personal Data Protection provides that the Directorate of Personal Data Protection can impose prohibition on further personal data processing.  d) The inspector in charge of performing the inspection can take a decision on the prohibition of personal database, processing, storing, distribution and use or their deletion, if their complete protection is not ensured or the provisions and procedures related to the obligations of the personal database manager for undertaking organisational and technological changes are not implemented accordingly.  The mentioned decision may be appealed within seven days from the day the decision was delivered. The complaint is submitted to the Minister in charge of the administration body responsible for the operation of the information technology and system in the Republic of Macedonia, who reaches a decision within 15 days of the day the complaint was delivered.  The existing Law provides fines of 20 to 35 salaries for any violation by the personal database manager if he/she: 1.  Collects, processes, stores, uses and distributes personal data with no authorisation by the law or by the personal data holder in writing;  2.  Fails to identify the regulation to determine and implement the procedures and measures for personal data protection; 3.  Transfers information in relation to personal database, processing, storing and distributing to other legal or natural entities which are not authorised to perform such activities; 4.  Fails to delete from the personal database the data after termination of the need for which they were collected, processed, used and stored; 5.  Distributes personal data to unauthorised users or does not have internal register of distributing or distributes personal data to users in the form which may reveal the identity of the personal data holders;  6.  Fails to ensure that the catalogue of the personal databases include data provided by the law (Article 15) or fails to submit data on the needs of the collections catalogue;  7.  Fails to enable the personal data holder or his/her proxy access to and a copy of the data related to him/her; 8.  Fails to make additions, corrections and deletions of data which the personal data holder can prove are incomplete, incorrect and out of date;  9.  Fails to make  corrections in the data in respect of which the holder has withdrawn the written consent ; 10. Presents personal data out of the Republic of Macedonia in contradiction to the provisions in this Law. The fine of one to five salaries for the listed violations applies also to the person supervising the database manager.  A fine of five to ten salaries is provided for the listed violations for a person performing an activity or profession on a self-employed basis, and a fine of one to two salaries for the listed violations for natural entities. In line with the newly adopted Law on Personal Data Protection, which is in progress, a fine of 40.000 to 50.000 MKD is determined for the violation of the Controller if he/she:    collects and processes personal data in contradiction to this Law regarding the quality of the personal data which are being processed;    performs personal data processing in contradiction to the provisions in this Law, regarding the prior consent of the personal data holder being the necessary condition for the personal data processing, as well as exclusions from the stated rule;    performs personal data processing in contradiction to the provisions in this Law related to the personal data processing in relation to criminal acts, punishment and safety measures against criminal acts committed;   performs special category personal data processing in contradiction to the provisions in this Law;    performs processing of the personal ID number of the citizen contrary to the provisions in this Law;   acts in contradiction to the provisions in this Law regarding personal data holder’s rights when the data is collected from the personal data holder;   acts in contradiction to the provisions in this Law regarding personal data holder’s rights when the data is not collected from the personal data holder;   acts in contradiction to the provisions in this Law regarding obligations of the Controller to present for control the personal database urgently and with no delay within 5 days;   acts in contradiction to the provisions in this Law regarding the right of the Controller to refuse to respond to the same or similar requirement of the personal data holder in cases when he/she responded to the personal data holder if in the meantime there is no change in the personal data, except when 6 months have passed from the previous to the new request;    acts in contradiction to the provisions in this Law regarding the obligation and type of information which the Controller is obliged to submit within 30 days to the personal data holder, in response to their written request;   acts in contradiction to the provisions in this Law regarding the Controller’s obligation to add, change, delete or prevent the use of personal data, a response  in accordance with the request of the personal data holder when the data are incomplete, incorrect and out of date and when their processing is not in compliance with the provisions in this Law;   enables use of the personal data for advertising purposes in contradiction with the request of the personal data holder;   acts in contradiction to the provisions in this Law regarding the Controller’s obligation to undertake adequate organisational and technical measures in order to ensure the personal data confidence and protection;    transfers activities included in his/her working operations to the data processor with no prior contract;   fails to  make record of the undertaken technical and organisational measures, i.e. evidence of signed contracts;   fails to make record of the personal databases;   fails to submit information to the Directorate about any complete or partial personal data processing or changes of data in the information;   acts in contradiction to the provisions in this Law regarding the Directorate of Personal Data Protection on the degree of adequacy of personal data protection    gives personal data to users against which there is prohibition to process or use; A fine of 200.000 to 300.000 MKD for the listed violations also applies to the legal entity – the Personal Data Controller. In order to ensure regular and efficient work in the Directorate, the Director and employees in the Directorate of Personal Data Protection are authorised to: enter any premises where a registered personal data processing system is installed, request a written or oral explanation and summon for investigation individuals related to the personal database which is being investigated, request presentation of documentation and other evidence related to the subject of control, control the equipment used for personal database processing and storing and order an expert analysis and opinion on the Controller’s work.  Minutes are prepared on the performed control and a copy is submitted to the Controller who was subject of control. The minutes are signed by the employee at the Directorate who performed the control and the Controller who was subject of control. In cases when the Controller refuses to sign the minutes, the employee at the Directorate notes this down in the minutes and is entitled within seven days from the day of control to submit the notes in writing to the Director.  If during the control of personal data processing violations of provisions in this Law have been determined, the Controller is obliged to bring his/her work in compliance with the provisions in this Law within 30 days from the day when violations have been discovered, and particularly regarding:    the elimination of the reasons behind the violations;   completion, updating, correction, revealing or protecting the confidentiality of the personal data;   adoption of additional measures for personal database protection;   terminating the transfer of personal data to other countries;   providing data or their transfer to other subjects; or   deletion of personal data. The Controller can request from the Directorate to re-consider his/her case, whereas the decision of the Director may be appealed.  
4. Does the Supervisory Authority have powers to engage in legal proceedings in case of violation of data protection provisions? 
In accordance with the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 12/94 and 04/02), the supervision of the legal procedure in collecting, processing, storing, using and distributing personal data in the Republic of Macedonia is performed by the body determined by law which provides the establishment of data collections.  Inspection of the performance of organisational and technological procedures and measures for personal data protection and maintaining data collection catalogues are performed by the administration body responsible for the information technology activities and the information system in the Republic of Macedonia. The inspector in-charge who performs the inspection is authorised to decide on the prohibition to collect, process, store, distribute and use personal data from collections, i.e. to delete them when their complete protection is not ensured, or the provisions and measures related to undertaking organisational and technological procedures and measures are not implemented accordingly. The above stated decision may be appealed within eight days from the day of on which the decision is served. The appeal is submitted to the Minister in charge of the administrative body in the field of information technology and information system of the Republic of Macedonia. Having in mind that a particular independent body, in line with the existing law, has not been established yet, the newly adopted Law on Personal Data Protection (adopted by the Parliament on 25 January 2005, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 07/05) suggests that the supervision of the undertaken activities for personal data processing and protection on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia is performed by the Directorate of Personal Data Protection, an independent and autonomous state body with the status of legal entity. One of the basic responsibilities of this Directorate is its authorisation to evaluate the legality of personal data processing. The new Law regulates the right of every natural person who believes that his/her right guaranteed by this Law has been violated,  to submit a request for determining the violation to the Commission at the Directorate of Personal Data Protection. The mentioned Commission includes three members nominated by the Directorate’s Director. The Commission reaches a decision on the violation, which is an administrative act, which may be appealed against to the Director. The Director’s decision on the appeal can be challenged in an administrative procedure.  Acting upon the request of the natural entity stated above, the Commission at the Directorate of Personal Data Protection can reach an interim decision on prohibiting further personal data processing of the relevant data, until the procedure is resolved accordingly.  The appeal against the temporary decision is submitted to the Directorate’s Director.    The Director’s decision entails the right to court protection, i.e. the right to initiate an administrative dispute. The provisions recommended in the newly adopted Law involve the Directorate of Personal Data Protection as a party in the administration and court procedure. The newly adopted Law also provides that in cases when an employee of the Directorate who performed the control has determined violations of provisions in this Law related to personal data processing, he/she is obliged to inform the Director in order to initiate a procedure against it.  In cases when during control, violations of the provisions in this Law related to personal data processing are identified, the Controller is obliged to comply with the provisions of this law within 30 days, and in particular to:   eliminate the reasons behind the violation;   complete, update, correct, reveal or keep the confidentiality of the personal data;   adopt additional measures on personal data collection protection;   terminate the transfer of personal data to other countries;   provide the data or their transfer to other subjects; and   delete personal data. The Controller may require from the Directorate to have his case re-considered, whereas an administrative dispute may be initiated against the Director’s decision. 
5. Does the Supervisory Authority have powers to bring to the attention of judicial authorities the violations of data protection provisions? Can the decisions taken by the Supervisory Authority which give rise to complaints be appealed against through the courts? 
According to the Law on Personal Data Protection (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 12/94 and 04/02), the inspector from the supervisory body, i.e. the administration body responsible for the operations in information and the information system of the Republic of Macedonia performing the inspection of organisational and technological procedures and measures for personal data protection and maintaining personal data collections, is given the right to: 1.  Undertake measures to eliminate the inappropriate activities for implementing provisions in this Law related to the implementation of organisational and technological procedures and measures, and the obligation to maintain personal data collection catalogues; 2.  Prohibit the collection, processing, storing, distributing and using personal data from collections, i.e. deleting in cases when their complete protection is not ensured or the provisions and procedures of this Law for undertaking organisational and technological measures provided in the Law are implemented inaccordingly. The decision may be appealed within eight days from the day the decision was served. The contents in the appeal are reviewed and decided by the Minister in charge of the administrative body responsible for the operations in information and the information system in the Republic of Macedonia. The decision on the appeal is reached by the Minister within 15 days of its delivery. Having in mind that the adopted act is administrative, or reached as a result of an administrative procedure, the provisions of the Law on Administrative Disputes are implemented (Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia Nos. 04/77 and 44/02), in order to ensure court protection. The final administrative act can be challenged in the responsible court.  In addition to the previously guaranteed court protection, the Law on Personal Data Protection also provides court protection guarantee. Namely, it provides that any person who believes that his/her rights determined by this law have been violated may require court decision by the court of competent jurisdiction.  In cases when a person suffered damage by the use of data in the manner and for the purpose which is not in compliance with this Law, the Law provides the person with the possibility to require compensation for the damage. The newly adopted Law on Personal Data Protection (adopted by the Parliament on 25 January 2005, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia No. 07/05) provides that any natural entity who believes that any of his/her rights guaranteed by this Law have been violated, may submit a request for determining the violation to the Commission at the Directorate of Personal Data Protection which is composed of three members appointed by the Directorate’s Director. The violation of the right, in line with the mentioned Law, is considered by the Commission and a decision is reached. It is an administrative act, appealed against with the Directorate’s Director, whereas the Director’s decision may be challenged before the responsible court.  Acting on the request from the natural entity for determining the violation of rights, the Commission may issue an interim decision to prohibit the further processing of the personal data in question, until the procedure has been resolved accordingly. Regarding the damage to the natural entity performed by the personal data processing or based on other violations performed in contradiction to the provisions in this Law, the Controller of the personal data collection is held responsible; unless he/she is able to prove that the damage was not caused as a result of his/her fault. Damage compensation from the Collection Controller may be requested in cases of unauthorised use, or unauthorised access to use of the personal data to other users and natural and legal entities.  
