II. ACCOUNTING AND AUDIT 
A. Accounting 

1. What legal instruments do you have in the accounting field? Are there any official instructions or recommendations by a standard-setting body? 
Accounting is regulated by the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 28/04), in the Rulebook for Accounting Standards (“Official Gazette of RM” No 40/97 and 73/99), where the International Accounting Standards of the International Accounting Standards Committee are adopted, as accounting standards that have been applied in the Republic of Macedonia as of 01.01.1998, as well as by the Law on Budget and Budget Beneficiaries Accounting (“Official Gazette of RM” No 61/02 and 98/02), and other adopted secondary legislation. The accounting procedure for non-profit organizations is prescribed in the Law on Accounting for Non-profit Organizations (“Official Gazette of RM” No 24/03). The Minister of Finance prescribes the procedure for maintenance of accounting and business books, accounting documents and data processing, accounting organization, reconciliation of incomes and expenses, evaluation of balance positions, re-evaluation and non-profit organizations’ inventory with the Rulebook for Accounting for non-profit organizations (“Official Gazette of RM” No 42/03). The Accounting Standards Committee was established by Government decision No 23-1436/1 on 23.06.1997 with the objective to monitor, harmonize and explain International Accounting Standards. 2. Which enterprises fall within the scope of the general regulations? Are there special regulations for limited liability companies? Are there exceptions for small and medium sized companies? 
According to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 28/04), (article 469), the obligation for accounting applies to: each large and medium size trader, traders defined by the law, and traders involved in banking, insurance, traders listed on the stock-exchange as well as traders whose financial reports are included in the consolidated financial reports of the above listed traders. All entities are obliged to prepare and submit financial reports according to the adopted international accounting standards. International Accounting Standards are updated on annual base, to be harmonized with current standards, as they are amended and adopted by the International Accounting Standards Board. According to the Company Law (Article 478) the following traders are subject to auditing:        -     large and medium size traders organized as joint-stock companies companies with securities listed on the stock exchange  large and medium size traders organized as limited liability companies. Small-size companies have no obligation to do audits of own annual reports. The small-size entities are obliged to prepare their own financial reports with reduced scope of data. 
3. Are consolidated accounts (the accounts of groups of companies) as well as the accounts of individual companies regulated? If so, are there exceptions for any groups of enterprises (e.g. size thresholds, legal forms) from the requirement to draw up consolidated accounts? 
Trade companies, according to Article 504 of the Company Law (“Official Gazette of  RM” No. 28/04) which have dominant influence in one or several companies, are obliged to prepare and publish consolidated annual account statement and consolidated financial reports. The consolidated annual account statement and the consolidated financial reports are prepared in accordance with the prescribed accounting provisions established by the Minster of Finance, with the purpose of targeting tax effects.  Consolidated financial reports are prepared according to the international accounting standards. The consolidated annual account and the consolidated financial reports must be prepared at the same date when the annual account and the financial reports of the dominant company are prepared. The consolidated annual account includes a consolidated balance sheet and consolidated balance of success. Article 504 of the Company Law is implicit that no trade company with dominant influence (independently of its size) is exempt from the obligation to prepare consolidated annual accounts and consolidated financial reports. According to the Company Law, Article 505, the consolidated financial reports include a consolidated balance sheet, consolidated balance of success, consolidated money flew sheet, consolidated report on core capital changes and notices for consolidated reports, applied accounting policies and other information. 
4. What sanctions exist for not complying with financial reporting requirements? 
According to Article 599 of the Company Law, (“Official Gazette of RM” No 28/04) the trade companies will be penalized for committing a misdemeanour with monetary fine between 50.000 to 150.000 MKD, if they don’t prepare, publish and submit annual accounts, i.e. consolidated annual accounts and financial reports. Monetary fine between 10.000 to 50.000 MKD is prescribed for the responsible person in the trade company for committing a misdemeanour. In addition to the monetary fine, security measure - prohibition for performing activities in the period of three months to one year is applied for the trade companies. To the responsible person is given a security measure – prohibition for performing duty in the period of three months to one year. 
5. What reforms of the legal instruments in the accounting area are planned, what is their content and when are they programmed for adoption? 
The Ministry of Finance is working on drafting secondary legislation acts regarding budget’s accounting, budget’s beneficiaries and non-profit organizations. In addition, by the end of 2005 new Decree on Account Plan for Banks, Savings Banks And Other Financial Companies, will be prepared and enacted in accordance with the International Accounting Standards, to harmonize the balance schemes with new draft provisions for the accounting plan in accordance with Directive 86/635/EEC (for bank accounts) and a written elaboration of the contents of each account in the accounting plan for banks, savings banks and other financial companies. Regarding the insurance companies accounting, the Ministry of Finance is preparing new Decree on Accounting Plan for the Insurance Companies and new Rulebook on the form and contents of balance schemes for the Insurance Companies, with which will be performed full harmonization with the EU Directive 91/674/EEC for annual accounts of insurance companies. These Acts are planned to be enacted in 2005. In the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04) in the part on accounting, the EU directives in the field of accounting (the Fourth 78/660/EEC, Sixth 82/891/EEC and Seventh 84/253/EEC Directive) are completely implemented by applying International Accounting Standards in conducting the accountancy in the Republic of Macedonia. The present accounting regulations have been drafted in accordance with the international criteria and standards and the EU Directives, prior to the enactment of the Law on Budgets and Budget Beneficiary Accounting (“Official Gazette of  RM” No. 61/02 and 98/02) and the Law on Accounting for Non-profit Organizations (“Official Gazette of  RM” No. 24/03). The upon mentioned regulations have been delivered to the European Commission for review and appropriate directions, proposals and suggestions by the EU experts, with the main objective, to complete the reforms of the accounting system, providing maximum harmonization of our accounting system with the systems in developed countries, i.e. at a recognized and accepted international level. The future plans include update of the harmonization of accounting regulations with the EU directives. 
6. Are the Fourth (78/660) and/or the Seventh Directives (83/349) taken into account in these reforms? 
The Fourth Directive (78/660) and the Seventh Directive (83/349) have been taken into consideration in the reforms. According to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/96, 7/97, 21/98, 37/98, 63/98, 39/99, 81/99, 37/2000, 31/01, 50/01, 6/02, 61/02, 51/03) the Minister of Finance in 1999 prescribed the form and the contents of the balance schemes (Rulebook on prescribing the form and contents of the balance schemes, ”Official Gazette of RM” No. 23/99) which is compulsory obligation of the EU member countries, included in the Fourth and the Seventh Directive, as well as the Directive 86/635/EEC (for bank accounts) and the Directive 91/674/EEC (insurance accounts). The balance sheet is prepared by all companies that conduct the accounting according to the Company Law and International Accounting Standards, where the small size companies prepare this balance sheet in a shorten manner by filling in positions marked with letters and Roman numbers. For large and medium size companies a particular type of balance of success is prescribed, while for small size companies different balance schemes (with the Rulebook on prescribing the form and contents of the balance schemes) are prescribed, i.e. the balance sheet of success for small size companies. According to the regulations in accounting referring to banks, savings banks and other financial organizations, the Minister of Finance prescribes particular balance schemes (Rulebook on the form and contents of the balance schemes for banks, savings banks and other financial organizations (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 27/1999)). With the Rulebook on the contents and form of the balance schemes for insurance and re-insurance companies (“Official Gazette of RM “No. 36/99, 34/02), separate balance schemes are prescribed for insurance and re-insurance companies. 
7. Have international standards or practices had an impact? 
The International Accounting Standards have been implemented since 01.01.1998 in the Republic of Macedonia. All commercial entities implement the International Accounting Standards. Large size trade companies and those that participate on the stock-exchange, as well as those that are required, are obliged to implement the International Accounting Standards. By adopting the International Accounting Standards and prescribing the unique balance schemes, that arisen as an obligation of the EU member countries, included in the Fourth and the Seventh Directive, as well as the Directive 86/635/EEC (for bank accounts) and the Directive 91/674/EEC (insurance accounts), in the Republic of Macedonia was provided implementation of unique accounting regulations and a high level of harmonization of the accounting practices. In the same time the country is meeting the requirements for creation an accounting system compatible with the one in the EU countries. 
8. Are the Council Directives 86/635/EEC (bank accounts) and 91/674/EEC (insurance accounts) taken into account in these reforms? 
The Council Directives 86/635/EEC (on bank accounts) and 91/674/EEC (on insurance accounts) have been taken into consideration in the reforms, where particular balance schemes for the banks and particular balance schemes for the insurance companies are prescribed. (for more details see  05_II_A_ _5According to the accounting regulations for banks, savings banks and other financial organizations in the Republic of Macedonia, the Minister of Finance prescribed particular balance schemes (Rulebook on the form and contents of the balance schemes on banks, savings banks and other financial organizations “Official Gazette of RM” No. 27/99). Also, separate balance schemes are prescribed for the insurance and re-insurance companies with the Rulebook on the contents and form of the balance schemes for the insurance and re-insurance companies (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 36/99, 34/02). 
9. Is the IAS (International Accounting Standards) Regulation 1606/2002 taken into account in these reforms? 
The regulations for the implementation of the International Accounting Standards (IAS) have been completely taken into consideration. By adopting the IAS and prescribing the unique balance schemes, that arise as an obligation for the EU member countries, the contents in the Fourth and the Seventh Directive, in the Republic of Macedonia was provided implementation of unique accounting regulations and high level of harmonization of the accounting practices. In the same time the country is meeting the requirements for creation an accounting system compatible with the one in the EU countries. 
B. Statutory auditors 

1. If auditors exist, what authority is issuing them certificates and is responsible for their supervision? How many such certificates have been issued and how many of these were issued in 2003 (or the most recent year for which reliable data is available; please specify which year)? 
The Law on Audit (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 65/97, 27/2000, 31/01 and 61/02) regulates the issuing of work permit according to which the founder of an audit company submit request and the prescribed documentation to the Ministry of Finance. The Minster of Finance decides upon the submitted request within 30 days from the day of submitting the request.  The audit companies, which are licensed, are registered in the audit company register at the Ministry of Finance. According to the record from this register, 20 licenses have been issued for the audit companies based on permanent certification for authorised auditors until the end of October 2004. The Minister of Finance takes away the work permit of the audit companies with Decision, in cases when they are not performing the audit in accordance with the Law and the procedures established with the International Accounting Standards, or in other cases prescribed by the Law. In the past period, based on the provisions in the Law, the Minister of Finance has issued certificates for authorised auditors, based on written request and applied documentation, to the individuals in the field of science and practice who meet the conditions prescribed by the Law for recognition the title of an authorised auditor, as well as certificates for authorised auditors to the persons that have passed the exam for the authorised auditor. According to the register in the Ministry of Finance, the total number of issued certificates to authorised auditors is 136. In 2003, 47 permanent certificates for authorised auditors were issued, and in 2004, 43 permanent certificates for authorised auditors were issued. (Regulated in the Articles 5, 6, 8, 30, 31 and 38-a of the Law on Audit). 
2. What requirements must be fulfilled to work as an auditor (training, experience, ethical rules)? What provision has been made for the necessary training? How many individuals underwent training in 2003 (or the most recent year for which reliable data is available; please specify which year)? 
Only an authorised auditor, employed in the audit company can be performed the Audit. The authorised auditor is independent and autonomous in performing the audit within his/her authorizations provided by the Law and the International Audit Standards. According to the Law on Audit (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 65/97, 27/2000, 31/01 and 61/02), the authorized auditor must meet the following conditions: 1.  to have Higher Education - Graduate  economist; 2.  to pass the exam for authorised auditor and to have certificate for authorised auditor; 3.  no previous criminal record, i.e. be appropriate for the audit profession, and 4.  to give a statement that he/she will apply in his/her work  the rules established by the Code of Ethics of Professional Accountants and International Federation of Accountants. The candidate for passing the exam for an authorised auditor, must have a minimum of 5 years of working experience in accounting, financial or evaluation activities, i.e. 3 years of working experience in audit or control operations. During the audit, the auditor applies audit standards established by the International Federation of Accountants. When the text based on the International Audit Standards was completed by the Committee on Audit Standards, the standards was published in the (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 51/98). The Code of Ethics of professional accountants of the International Federation of Accountants was published in the special Bulletin of the Ministry of Finance in April 1998, reproduced with permission from IFAC. In the present Law on Audit, there are no provisions for compulsory continuous professional training. The new Law on Audit, which is expected to be adopted in the second phase by the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia in the first half of 2005, includes provisions stating that the authorised auditor is obliged to take courses with a prescribed number of classes over the year for continuous professional training and upgrading in the field of accounting and audit, organized by the Institute for Authorised Auditors. (Regulated with the Articles 17 paragraph 2, 28 and 29 of the Law on Audit). 
3. What sanctions exist in cases where statutory audit is carried out by an unauthorised person? 
The legal entity, i.e., the audit company shall be fined to the amount from 10.000 MKD to 300.000 MKD, in cases when: 1.  an audit is not performed in a manner as prescribed by the Law and according to procedure determined by the International Audit Standards; 2.   performing audit without having obtained a work permit; 3.  performing activities referred to in Article 11 paragraph 1 of this Law for the company where  the audit is conducted; 4.  performing audit  at the entity being audit, where the audit company owns shares or  has invested assets, i.e. if performs audit in the entity being audit which has made investments in the audit company; 5.  the audit company has no insurance for liability against damage caused by performing the audit , and in case it does not submit evidence on insurance of the liability against damages to the Ministry of Finance within the period prescribed for it; 6.  the legal entity has not obtained consent for engagement of an external expert by the entity being audited and 7.  the legal entity has not provided confidentiality of information and data obtained during the performance of the audit. A person holding a responsible position in the legal entity, i.e., the audit company, shall also be fined from 1.000 MKD to 50.000 MKD for the aforesaid misdemeanours. In addition to the fine referred to in Article 2 of this Article, the person in charge of the legal entity, i.e. audit company, shall be given a security measure of suspension from duties of positions of responsibility for a period from three months to one year. A natural entity, i.e., an authorised auditor shall be fined with amount from 1.000 MKD to 50.000 MKD in cases when:  1.  He/she does not conduct the audit using methods provided for by this law and according to procedures determined in  the  International Standards of Auditing; 2.  He/she does not determined accurate activities and states erroneous opinion in the report; 3.  He/she uses any of the documents drawn or obtained during the audit procedure for other purposes without having been given the consent by the entity being audited; 4.  He/she has not provided confidentiality of information and data obtained during the audit and uses the information obtained during the audit for gaining property or any other benefits for himself/herself or for any other subject; 5.  He/she conducts an audit over the entity without being allowed to do so and 6.  He/she conducts an audit without having been authorized as an authorised auditor. In addition to the aforesaid fine, an authorized auditor shall be given a security measure of suspension for practicing his/her professional business activity for a period from three months to one year for the aforesaid misdemeanours. (Provided for by Articles 34 and 37 of the part referring to penal regulations of the Law on Audit (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 65/97, 27/2000, 31/01 and 61/02)).  
4. Have the qualification requirements been amended lately or are changes planned? Have the provisions of the Eighth Directive (84/253) been taken into account? 
Regarding amendments of qualification requirements, there have been no amendments made in this field recently. Changes regarding qualification requirements are regulated by the Law on Audit, which is to be adopted. In line with the provisions of this, legal and contractual audit activities will be performed by certified auditors who have acquired an auditor certificate authorizing them to perform audit in the name of an audit company. Conditions to be met for sitting for the examination necessary for acquiring the title of an authorised auditor are the following: 1.  to have Higer Education –  Faculty of Economics; 2.  three years experience in audit under supervision of an authorised auditor; 3.  knowledge of Macedonian language; 4.  presented credentials for a completed course in theoretical knowledge; 5.  no previous criminal record, as follows : a)  in the period from effective criminal punishment until date when the punishment shall start to be served, and 5 years after the date when the prosecuted person has served the punishment, in case of conviction to punishment of imprisonment, of up to 3 years by a court sentence which has gone into effect; b)  in the period from when the sentence has gone into effect until the date when the punishment shall start to be served, and 10 years after the date when the prosecuted person has served the punishment, in case of conviction to a punishment of imprisonment for over 3 years by a court sentence which has gone into effect and 6.  no security measure of suspension from practicing his/her profession, activity or duty is given. The Directive Eighth (84/253) has been taken into consideration while drafting the new law. The second phase of adopting the new Law on Audit by the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia is planned for the first half of 2005. 5. Do statutory audits in your country comply with the principles and requirements set out in the Commission Recommendations of 16 May 2002 (Statutory Auditors' Independence in the EU: A Set of Fundamental Principles, OJ L 191 of 19.7.2002) and of 15 November 2000 (quality assurance for the statutory audit in the European Union: minimum requirements, OJ L 91 of 31.3.2001)? 
The commitment of the Republic of Macedonia to a full compliance of the national legislation with EU legislation, and the readiness to take advantage of the recommendations of the European Commission for providing independence of auditors, high quality of legal audit and legal regulations, has led to the requirement for adopting a new Law on Audit. The objective is to establish a strong and powerful professional association which will undertake activities that have so far been performed by the Ministry of Finance, this also to the end of solving problems related to the auditor’s profession. The provisions set out in the existing Law on Audit (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 65/97, 27/2000, 31/01 and 61/02), generally meet the principles and conditions of the Commission's Recommendations dated 16 May 2002 (independence of authorised auditors). Legal audit is performed in accordance with the principles of independence set out in the Commission's Recommendations and included in the existing Law on Audit. The new Law on Audit will certainly continue to incorporate these principles. The new  Law on Audit, which is to be adopted by the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia in the first half of 2005, regulates these principles in more detail (it will include provisions on violating the independence of authorised auditors while providing no-audit services to the entity being audited). The new Law on Audit will provide legal audit quality at EU level, advised in the EU Commission's Recommendations EU dated 15 November2000. 
6. If yes, are such principles and requirements part of your audit legislation or do you have any plans to give such principles and requirements a legally binding status, in line with the Communication adopted by the Commission on 21 May 2003 (COM(2003)286)? 
The new Law on Audit, which is in the process of adoption, deregulates the existing legal regulations, and transfers completely the existing legal authorizations and powers in the field of audit, or in certain segments partially, from the Ministry of Finance to the Council for Audit Promotion and Supervision and the Institute for Authorized Auditors. The goal is to stimulate the promotion of this profession, monitor the process of acquiring the title of a authorized auditor and observe the work of the Institute for Authorized Auditors by the Council. The establishment of this Institute shall promote high professional standards and improve audit services. The principles and requirements of the EU Commissions' Recommendation will acquire a legal and obligatory status with the new Audit Law. They will be achieved by the establishment of the Council for Audit Promotion and the Institute for Authorized Auditors, with and appropriate structure, distribution of obligations and responsibilities among these bodies, and the method of regulating their operations. The second phase of adopting the new Law on Audit by the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia is planned for the first half of 2005. 
