I. COMPANY LAW 
A. Legal Framework 

1. What protection is provided to shareholders under your country’s legislation (e.g decision-making power on fundamental issues; pre-emption rights; equal treatment of shareholders of the same class; shareholder protection measures related to mergers and divisions etc.)? Please specify. 
In the Republic of Macedonia, according to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04), see 05_Annex_01, shareholders are entitled to exercise their own rights in the company through the General Members’ Meeting (Shareholders’ Assembly). From the day of entry into the Book of Stakes, each shareholder is entitled to the following rights: take part in the work of the Members’ Meeting, exercise their right to vote, and decide on fundamental issues as stipulated in the Company Law (change the statute, adopt annual account, adopt financial reports, decide on the distribution of profit, appoint and dismiss the management body members etc.). The shareholders are entitled to equal positions in the company under equal conditions. Each signed contract or undertaken legal activity by any shareholder that violates the rights and interests of other shareholders is considered null and void, except if all shareholders agree on such contract or legal issue. As laid down in the Company Law, the shareholders may reject the resolutions of the Member’s Meeting. The increase of the core capital is done by the resolution of the Member Meeting, adopted by majority of votes, no less than two thirds of the vote carrying stakes represented at the Members Meeting. In case of multiple class shares, this resolution is valid if the majority of shareholders of each share class agree, however the majority may not be less than 2/3 of the shares. In case of increasing the core capital, the shareholders have the priority of subscribing newly issued shares, proportionally to the participation of their shares in the core capital of the company.  The decrease of the core capital is done by the resolution of the Members’ Meeting, adopted with the majority of votes, which can not be less then 2/3 of the votes based on stakes – presented at the Members’ Meeting. In case of several classes of shares, this resolution is valid if the majority of shareholders from each class of shares agree, as stated above. Also, when a shareholding company is being transformed into another form, the protection of the shareholders is clearly provided through the obligation prescribed in the Company Law which lays down that the resolution for transformation of the company from one to another form must be reached by the Members’ Meeting (Assembly) with the majority of votes, with a minimum vote of 2/3 of the shares with the right to vote presented in the Assembly. The Company Law in this case provides the opportunity for the shareholders to declare if they want to take part in the new form of company with their shares, respective to the nominal value of their shares. The shareholder independently decides on his/her participation, the number of shares he/she will participate with in the form of company to be established with the transformation. If the shareholder does not agree with the transformation, the company is obliged to buy his/her shares at the price proper to the adopted balance sheet in the resolution for the company transformation. If the shareholder does not accept the offered price he/she may file a proposal to the court to establish the real value of his shares, within 30 days from the day of refusing the offer. The Company Law includes provisions which ensure procedure transparency for achieving status change (accession, merger and division) and protection of the shareholders’ rights. The resolution for accession, merger and division is reached by the Members’ Meeting of each company involved in the accession, merger and division with the majority of votes, but not less then 2/3 of the shares with votes based on parts presented in the Assembly, except if the statute requires higher majority. If, as a consequence of the status change, the obligations of the shareholders are increased, the resolution is reached by agreement of all shareholders.  Each shareholder is entitled to inspection of the Agreement or the Division Plan and annexes which are included in them. At least one month prior to the day determined for the Members’ Meeting to reach the resolution to adopt the Agreement or the Division Plan, each participating company is obliged to enable the shareholders access to the company’s premises to go through the documents and other important information and notices that are important for reaching the resolution on accession, merger or division.  The Agreement, i.e. Division Plan are binding when adopted by the Members’ Meetings (Assemblies) of the companies that take part in the accession, merger or division. The shareholder who has declared that he/she does not want to takeover shares in the merger company, a new company that is established by merger, or a newly established company, the company is obliged to buy his/her shares at the price established in the resolution for accession, merger or division. If the shareholder does not accept the offered price, he/she may file a proposal to the court to establish the real value of his shares within a deadline of 30 days from the day of refusing the offer.  The Company Law has equal treatment of shareholders of the same class, i.e. shares of the same class provide the same rights.  
2. Is there a minimum capital requirement for companies? If so, what is it? Are there safeguard clauses to protect the company’s capital, e.g. rules on distributions to shareholders, on acquisition by a company of its own shares, on providing financial assistance to third parties for the acquisition of a company’s shares? 
According to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04), the minimum company’s core capital for establishing a company is as follows: For Limited Liability Company, the core capital may not be lower then 5.000 EUR in MKD counter value, based on the average exchange rate of the National Bank of Macedonia on the day of payment. For Joint-stock Companies, a) with simultaneous foundation, without public announcement for subscribing shares, the nominal value of the minimum core capital amounts to 25.000 EUR in MKD counter value based on the average exchange rate of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia published on the day of adopting the statute; and b) for successive foundation, with public announcement for subscribing shares, the minimum amount is 50.000 EUR in MKD counter value. In case of decreasing the core capital value, the company cannot pay dividend higher then 4% of the company’s core capital, before two years have elapsed from the year when the decision on decreasing the core capital is adopted. This restriction is not valid in case when until the registration of the decision for decreasing the core capital in the trade register, the company meets the creditors’ claims or issued suitable securities for their claims. The Company Law provides for a simplified method of decreasing the core capital, which can be used only in case of adjusting the core capital nominal value, to a lower nominal value, which is due to the loss covered by the core capital. In this case, the company has no obligation to meet the creditors’ claims. A simplified decrease of the core capital may be done by a Decision, which needs to include a provision that the aim for the core capital decrease is to cover the losses and allocate funds in the law prescribed reserves. The simplified core capital decrease is applied only in the case when the company’s undistributed profit and reserves are spent. The value of the decreased core capital cannot be paid to the shareholders and cannot be used for the purpose of exempting the shareholders from further deposit investment, according to which they overtook shares. The company can have acquisition of own shares by purchasing shares by itself or by means of a person that acts in his/her own name on behalf of the company. The purchase of own shares is legally valid under the following conditions: 1)  The Members’ Meeting (Shareholders’ Assembly) has adopted a Decision to obtain own shares by purchasing, which regulates the purchasing method, the highest number of shares to be acquired, the purchasing time framework , which must not be longer then twelve months and the minimum and maximum value that can be paid for them; 2)  The acquired share nominal value, together with the shares that the company has acquired previously, i.e. that the company owns, must not exceed 1/10 of the core capital; 3)  The acquisition of company’s own share must not decrease the company assets below the value of the core capital and reserves, which, according to the statute or to the law, must be provided and must not be used for payment to shareholders; 4)  The company acquires shares by purchasing shares which have been completely paid. As an exception, the company can acquire own shares in contradiction to the previously stated conditions in case when the acquisition of own shares is necessary to prevent serious damage that the company may encounter. The decision on this is adopted by the Board of Directors, i.e. the Managing Board upon previous agreement of the Supervisory Board. In this case, at the next Assembly meeting the Board of Directors, i.e. the Managing Board is obliged to inform the Assembly about the reasons and purpose for acquisition of own shares, the number and nominal value of the acquired shares, the part of the acquisition shares in the core capital, the share price and the source of the assets used for the acquisition.  The company cannot lend money or in any other way credit the subscriber in the payment for shares.  
3. Are enterprises subject to particular obligations regarding the protection of creditors and if so, what are they? 
The Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 28/04), enforced in May 2004, provides that trade companies have obligation to protect creditors in Limited Partnership Company in the following cases: Limited partners who have not paid the entire contribution as stipulated in the Partnership Agreement shall be liable to the creditors of the limited partnership jointly and severally with other partners up to the amount of the agreed contribution decreased by the amount already paid. (Article 162 of the Company Law).    The members and the manager shall be jointly and severally liable to the limited liability company for damages caused intentionally or due to gross negligence in the failure to make contributions or by improper making of non-monetary contributions, as a result of inflated valuation of contributions or any other detrimental behavior and action undertaken in the procedure for founding of the company for which the court finds them liable for the caused damage. If the compensation of damages is necessary for the purpose of fulfilling the liabilities against third parties, the limited liability company shall not give up the right to ask for compensation of damages nor negotiate regarding that right. (Article 181 of the Company Law). In case of decreasing core capital, the manager files an application form for entry in the trade register on the base of the resolution for the intention to decrease the core capital and announce in the “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”. The announcement shall state that the company agrees, upon request by the creditors, to settle the claim or to provide a guarantee. It shall be deemed that all creditors agree with the intended decrease of the core capital, if no claims have been filed following the expiry of ninety days as of the day of publishing the announcement. Known creditors shall also be notified in writing (Article 262 of the Company Law). The application for entering the decision on core capital decrease is submitted for the purpose of registration in the trade register, after the deadline observed to enable creditors to submit their claims. The application also includes evidence that the company has issued securities to the creditors to settle the registered claims. If the submitted proof that the company has settled the claims of the creditors or has given guarantee that the filed claims shall be settled is false, the manager shall be jointly and severally liable with his/her entire property for the damages caused by the creditors whom he/she provided with false information, but only up to the amount that could not be covered with the property of the company (Article 263 of the Company Law). The collateral of the creditors is prescribed in the Article 445 of the Company Law, where the company has obligation, for the claims established prior to the entry of the resolution on reduction of the core capital in the trade register, provided that: 1)  the creditor has reported his/her claim established prior to adopting the resolution on reduction of the core capital, regardless if the claim is matured, within 90 days as of the date of publishing the announcement on the intention to reduce the core capital; 2)  the creditor has requested collateral when reporting the claim which is not matured; and 3)  there are sufficient reasons to consider that the reduction of the core capital shall diminish the company's capability to settle the creditor's claim.   Members or shareholders of the company shall be severally liable for the company's liabilities, without limitation and jointly for the obligations of the company if they abuse the company as legal entity to make damage to own creditors (Article 28 of the Company Law).   Founders of the company are jointly and severally liable without limitations for the damage suffered by the company and the creditors due to illegal activities, false or incomplete data they provided with respect to the founding of the company, contained in the report on founding or entered in the trade register, or contained in the enclosures, which pursuant to this Law, shall be enclosed to the application form for founding the company. Furthermore, if the members of the managing body have failed to operate and act with due diligence of diligent and conscientious trader, they shall be liable to the company for the caused  damage as joint debtors (Article 299 and 362 of the Company Law). The companies with majority participation are considered responsible when they mislead a controlled company into undertaking certain legal affairs or action, or into failing to undertake such affair or action by which damage is caused to the controlled company or to a third party, and if they fail to compensate for the damages by the end of the business year. The company with majority participation must pay indemnity to the controlled company for the entire damage caused to the controlled company, and with regards to third party it shall be jointly and severely liable with the controlled company (Article 503 of the Company Law). In the procedure for status changes, there is an obligation to notify the creditors, as follows: known creditors whose claims are over 10.000 EUR in MKD counter value are to be notified in writing, individually  at  the address of their place of living, and if the creditor is a legal entity, at their headquarters’ address.  Creditors that may not request settlement of undue claims from the companies subject to the accession, merger or division, and who believe that the accession, merger, or division shall endanger the settlement of their claims, shall file a request for securing the claims to companies subject to accession, merger or division within 30 days as of the day of announcing the notification. If companies subject to accession, merger or division fail to respond to the creditor's request within 15 days as of the day of the submitted request or fail to provide the required collateral, the creditor may, in the next 8 days, file a request with the court for termination of the procedure for accession, merger, or division. If the court determines that in the course of the procedure for accession, merger or division the creditor's request was not met or the collateral was not provided, it shall suspend the procedure, until the company subject to accession, merger or division submits a proof to the court, within the specified term, that claims of all creditors have been secured. (Article 523 of the Company Law) The liquidators shall be obliged to complete the transactions in progress, collect the claims of the company, sell the remaining assets and settle the liabilities towards creditors. If so required by the liquidation, they may also enter into new transaction on behalf of the company in liquidation (Article 542 of the Company Law). 
4. Are companies required to publish information about major decisions affecting them? Are there other requirements for the publication of information by companies listed on the stock exchange? Are there for instance rules on contributions in kind and rules on creditor protection in the event of a reduction in the subscribed capital? 
In line with the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 28/04), the commercial entities are obliged to inform about decisions that affect their activity. The company is obliged to provide access to each shareholder in the company, shareholder’s representative and to the successor of a dead shareholder, for inspection and coping during the working hours of the company to all acts, documents and information in possession.  Each shareholder or previous shareholder, shareholder’s or successor of the late shareholder must be provided with the right to inspect the acts and other documents in the headquarters of the company, in the way prescribed by the agreement for the company, for the period when during which he/she was shareholder in the company.  If this right is not provided to the person he/she may request from the court with a proposal to make a decision on exercising this right. In a term not longer than within 8 days from the date of the request the court shall determine whether the person is entitled to access the documents and information and whether his/her access has been disabled, it shall bind the company to enable the access. Resolutions made at the Members’ Meeting, or resolutions made by the members by way of correspondence are recorded in the book of resolutions, by the manager. The resolutions shall be recorded in the book of resolutions immediately after they were made and certified with the signature of at least one of the members involved in the adoption of the resolution. The minutes from the held Members’ Meeting where the resolutions were adopted, as well as the material, which documents the process of resolution making by way of correspondence, as well as, the adopted resolutions, shall be an inherent part of the book of resolutions. Each member shall be entitled to inspect the book of resolutions and may request from the manager copies of resolutions adopted at the Members’ Meeting, or by way of correspondence. Each shareholder must be allowed to inspect acts and other documents of the company (the statute and other acts, minutes and other documents of all member shareholders, minutes and resolutions reached at the meetings of the Managing Board or Supervisory Board, annual accounts and financial reports, attachments entered in the trade register etc.) at the company’s venue as prescribed in the statute. The right to be informed about the minutes and resolutions reached at the meetings of the managing bodies is exercised by the shareholders through the non-executive members of the Board of Directors or Supervisory Board. If the company does not provide access for inspection and copying of the acts and documents, the shareholder can file a proposal to the court to allow inspection of acts and documents. In the proposal, the shareholder states the acts and documents that he would like to inspect or to obtain, and the form to be delivered. Within eight days from the filed proposal, the court will reach a decision where it binds the company to allow inspection of acts and documents stated in the proposal by the shareholder or provide a copy of the acts and documents at the company’s expense. At the Members’ Meeting each shareholder may require information about the condition of the company and its relations with other companies, if the information is related to the agenda of the meeting. The shareholder that required to be provided with information can file a written request that his/her question, requirement and the reasons due to which he/she was rejected to get information for, are registered in the minutes. The shareholder who was not given the information may also require protection of own notification right through the court. The proposal is filed within fifteen days from the day of the meeting. The Managing Board, not later than thirty days of the day of their approval, but not later then 30 ofJune, delivers copies of approved financial reports accompanied by the annual reports for the company’s activity, to the Annual Account Register at the Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia and displays them in the venue or another place for inspection. Each shareholder is entitled to the right to inspect them. The revised annual account, or revised financial reports where differences are established in the data of already submitted annual account or financial reports, are processes by the Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia . The annual accounts data and financial reports data are public and available to all persons in the manner as described in the law. The Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia  issues information, copies of accounts and certain data from electronic data base, in accordance with the Law on Central Register (“Official Gazette of  RM“ No. 50/01, 49/03). The shareholder who does not pay the subscribed shares within the defined terms and conditions can, by means of hand delivered mail, to be given additional time, with the remark that if in the prescribed deadline for payment is not met, he/she is deprived of all partially paid shares . Additional terms are announced in the daily newspaper. The shareholder who, despite the notification, does not pay in the necessary amount to the company, is deprived the shares and excluded from the company. In the announcement deprived shares in favour of the company are also announced. The Members' Meeting can be convened by invitation or by public announcement. The public announcement is published in at least one public newspaper. After reaching the decision on registration, the court, ex officio, delivers data from the trade register to be published in the “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”. The announcement includes acts according to which the registration was performed and states the right to inspection of these acts in the trade register. The trade register data and the court decisions, for cases prescribed by this law, are published in the “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”. Also, certain legal and other actions, according to the Law on Takeover of Joint-Stock Companies (“Official Gazette of RM” No 04/02 and 37/02) must be published in one daily newspaper on the territory of the Republic of Macedonia (public bid for purchasing securities, intention to purchase etc.) The Rulebook on quotation of securities on the Macedonian Stock Exchange JSC Skopje enforced on14.05.2004, where most European Directives in this field are implemented, also includes most of OECD General Principles for transparency and publishing information. The following constant publishing obligations refer to: General publication of data and information, announcements related to business activities (change of activity, status changes, mergers, joint deposits, important agreements etc.); obligations in relation with the capital (core capital increase/decrease, new loans, changes of issued shares rights, decisions for purchasing own shares etc); important changes in the financial condition (huge losses or important profit increase, information related with the profit, purchasing, selling assets, new credit debts etc.); announcement of the dividend calendar; shares in public ownership (notification if the percent of the shares in public ownership is decreased under provided minimum of 25%); notification for important shares. In the Republic of Macedonia, according to the Company Law, the shares can be paid in cash, by non-monetary deposit or a combination of both. Non-monetary deposit is paid to the entire amount prior to submitting the application for the establishment of the company. Non-monetary deposit must be made in such a way that the company can freely dispose with it, from the day of the registration of the establishment of the company in the trade register. Payment of the shares and other securities by labour or services, including labour and services already provided/executed is against to the Company Law. The protection of the creditors in the case of subscribed capital decrease is elaborated in the previous question. (for more details see 05_I__ _3
5. Do any particular regulations depend on the size of an enterprise? If so, what are they? The Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM “No. 28/04), obliges the company to inform about the resolutions that have affected its own activity. The Company Law is applied on all companies regardless of their size. However, for accounting purposes, in Article 470, commercial entities are classified as large, medium, small or micro-size commercial entities, depending on the number of employees, the annual revenues and the average value of the total assets on the basis of the annual account statements in the last two years (accounting years). Other laws also apply to commercial entities depending on their size, like the Law on Takeover of Joint-Stock Company (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 04/02 and 37/02), the Securities Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 63/2000, 103/2000; 34/01; 4/02; 37/02; 31/03; 85/03). 
6. To what extent is your legislation inconsistent with the First and Second Company Law Directives? The Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04), is completely harmonized with the First 68/151/EEC and the Second 77/91/EEC Company Law Directives, and the main objectives of these Directives are entirely met, i.e. the requirements for publishing information about joint-stock, limited liability companies and limited partnerships by shares  are determined; highest restriction is put on the reasons, based on which the undertaken obligations on behalf  of the companies are treated as invalid; there is a restriction in cases from which nullity can be produced as well as the rules for establishing a limited liability company, maintaining and changing the core capital of a limited liability company provided by the Law.  
7. Do you already have, or are you planning to introduce, legislation to align with the Third, Sixth, Eleventh and Twelfth Company Law Directives and the Take-over Bids Directive? 
The Company Law (“Official Gazette of  RM” No. 28/04) incorporates and is harmonized with the Third 78/855/EEC, Sixth 82/891/EC, Eleventh 89/666/EEC and Twelfth 89/667/EEC Company Law Directives.  As to the procedure for takeover of joint- stock company in the Republic of Macedonia, the Parliament of the Republic of Macedonia in 2002 adopted the Law on Takeover of Joint- Stock Company (“Official Gazette of  RM” No. 04/02 and 37/02). This Law is harmonized with the relevant Take-over Bids Directive. B. Administrative Capacity 

1. What types of companies are recognised by your law? What is the total number of enterprises in each category? 
According to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04) there are the following types of trade companies: general partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company, joint-stock company and limited partnership by shares. The total number of trade companies in each category is as follows: 

Types of companies Total number 1. general partnership companies; 2200 2. limited partnership companies; 3. limited liability companies; 62170 4. joint-stock companies; 754 5. limited partnerships by shares 
Source: State Statistical Office 
This data on trade companies refer to the period as of 31.12.2004. 
2. Is there a central register for companies? If not, are there any plans in this respect? If yes, how does the register hold the company information (in electronic form, on paper, etc.). Please provide details about the information held by the register, e.g. company name and objects, financial details, identity of those running the company, authorised representatives, major decisions affecting the company, etc. 
For the time being in the Republic of Macedonia there is no unique trade register, despite of the efforts to establish it in the past three years. According to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04) the unique register is to be established no later than 01.03.2005, and the transfer of the data in electronic form from the basic courts to the unique trade register is to be done no later than 01.07.2005. The establishment of the electronic connection and the unique register data is in the process of preparation. The Electronic Trade Register will be part of the central information base within the Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia, responsible for its establishing, maintenance and administration.  The trade register is maintained by the courts. The data entrance in the trade register is done by the competent court within which area of activity are the head quarters of the company to be registered. For the time being the registration is done by the Basic Court Skopje I Skopje, Basic Court Bitola and Basic Court Stip. The joint register of these courts is maintained by the Basic Court Skopje I Skopje. In the trade register the data are in written and in electronic form. The trade register is a public book that contains data and enclosures (documents and evidences) about companies legally obliged to be registered. The trade register consists of registration files, where registration data and enclosures of documents and evidences for each registered company are enclosed. All documents and evidences are maintained by the court in written form. The data on companies are maintained by all three courts in electronic form. The following data are included: Personal identification number, Number and date of filing the application for registration,  Subject of application, Title and address of the applicant, Legal form of the company, title and address of the company, Number and date of the act of establishing,  Founder’s data, Value and type of the founding core capital, Data on legal representatives, Data on the company’s activity, Date of the decision for registration. The decisions that are subject to registration according to the Law, also include the number and date of the reached decision by the relevant body. The electronic register contains all data changes that have been entered in electronic form since the company’s establishment or adjustment. The data on assets in possession of the commercial entities and financial details on their activities are not entered in the electronic trade register maintained by the courts. 
3. Are there any fees that are charged for issuing certain documents (certificates, copies, transcripts, attestations, notifications) contained in the company register? If yes, are these fees limited to cover the administrative costs incurred in issuing such documents or are they set in a different way? What is the procedure for issuing these documents? 
Concerning the issuing of certain documents which are part of the trade register, charges are paid according to the Law on Court Fees (“Official Gazette of SRM” No. 46/90, 11/91 and “Official Gazette of RM” No. 65/92, 20/95, 48/99). To file the application for registration in the trade register the fee is 1.200 MKD; To have the decision on registering the established company entered in the register the fee is 2.000 MKD; For the decision on registering an association, organization, changes in organization or status changes of the company, the fee is 1.000 MKD; For the decision to enter other data about the company or make changes of entered data, the charge is 500 MKD for each registry page; For the decision to register the termination of a company, the fee is 1.000 MKD; For the application to register the share of the entity, half of the prescribed registration fee has to be paid; For the decision to register the share of the entity, half of the prescribed fee has to be paid;  For the registration of data on changes in the share of the entity, half of the prescribed fee has to be  paid; For registering the share of the entity and deleting the share of the entity, the fee is 1.000 MKD; For registering changes in the registered share of the entity, the fee of 5.000 MKD has to be paid; For delivering entered data for the purpose of publishing in the” Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”, the fee is 500 MKD; For notary authorization for determining other facts in the Public Register, the notary is awarded with 200 MKD; For the certificate of performed administrative services based on this authorization the notary is awarded 1000 MKD; The court fees are limited only to execute activities and issuance of the abovementioned documents. The procedure for issuing documents is as follows: According to the Court Rules of Procedure (”Official Gazette of RM” No. 9/97 and 27/04) acceptance of the written correspondence (documents, acts, monetary letters, telegrams and other shipments) is performed at the provided place in the Court Register. The acceptance is performed by an authorized officer who confirms the acceptance by putting a stamp on the copy of the written document. The acceptance of the written correspondence posted to the court and the acceptance of the post from the post boxes are performed by an authorized court officer. The officer who accepts the written correspondence decides on the documents which have to be charged. If, while examining the documents the officer finds that the fee for the document has not been paid, or that the paid fee is lower than the prescribed or that it is a free of charge, the document is marked with the suitable stamp. If the evidence for paid fee is not attached to the written document, the officer will warn the party to pay it within the prescribed period. Accepted documents are transferred according to the marks in appropriate register files and immediately delivered to the Court Register manager. Upon party’s request, the court issues certificates, certificates on facts included in the documents or evidenced in the court and extracts from public books. Issuing certificates is performed by the Court Register. Regarding the contents of the court decisions, minutes and other documents, no certificates are issued but only transcripts and extracts. The transcripts are prepared in the Court Register or in the Copy Office and are delivered to the parties upon managers or authorized officer’s signature in the unfilled part of the note which reads: “the validity of the transcript is certified by ________”. 
4. How is information on companies published? Is there a national gazette? 
The data entered in the trade register are published in the “Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia”.  
5. How can the public get access to the company information register, e.g. in person, by mail, by electronic means, etc.? Is everyone entitled to consult the register without having to prove a legitimate interest in the enquiry? Is there a fee for consultation? 
With the provisions of the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04) the question of access to the trade register data is regulated. According to Article 85 of this Law, the data entered into the trade register are public. For the time being inspection of the trade register can be performed personally or by post. Each person, at his/her own expense, may submit a request to be issued a copy or registered transcript from the trade register data. Each person may submit the request to review the file with enclosures or be provided with a copy of the enclosures at his/her own expense, with the exception of the book of documents of the general partnership and the limited partnership. Any member or person who has a legal interest may inspect the book of documents of these partnerships.  As per the Law on Court Fees (“Official Gazette of SRM” No. 46/90, 11/91 and “Official Gazette of RM” No 65/92, 20/95, 48/99) court fees are paid for each activity in the procedure. According to the tariff number 28 of the Tariff Book, which is part of this law, related to transcripts of court acts, as well as transcripts of enclosures that the court will make upon party’s request, the fee is 100 MKD for each page of the original. For each additional copy of the transcript of court’s minutes, prepared at the same time with the original, the fee is 50 MKD. For transcript in a foreign language the fee is double of the abovementioned fees. For the request to be issued a transcript and certify the transcript the fee is 100 MKD. According to the Law on Court Fees, i.e. Tariff number 27 referring to inspection of court documents, the fee is 300 MKD. For any verbal enquiries as to whether the party is or not entitled to require transcripts of documents or to review documents, no fee is required. 
6. What is the average time-scale between application for registration and effective registration of a company? What is the number of companies registered at this moment and in the last two years? 
The procedure for registration in the trade register begins with filing a written application, a registration form which includes the registration application. All necessary enclosures are filed along with the application (documents and evidences) with necessary information to be entered into the trade register. According to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04) the trade register entrance procedure is considered urgent. If all necessary conditions are met, i.e. if the application with the enclosures is filed in accordance with the Law, the court of competent jurisdiction will reach a decision for entrance, within 8 days from the day of application.   Based on the data obtained from the courts of competent jurisdiction, the average time necessary for registration from the application day to the final registration of the trade companies is: 
Year  days 2001 57.5 2002 54.6 2003 54.3 Source: Ministry of Justice The number of trade companies that have been registered in the Republic of Macedonia in the past two years is: in 2002, 6.685 trade companies in 2003, 5.820 trade companies The number of registered companies in 2004 is 4.721 until 30.09.2004. The total number of registered companies is 65.126 on 31.09.2004. 
7. Are there any penalties or fines imposed on companies if annual accounts are not deposited at the company register? If so, what is the amount of such fines? What is the percentage of public and private limited liability companies that do comply with the requirement to file their annual accounts with the company register? 
The trade companies are obliged to submit their annual account to the Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia no later than the end of February of the following year, i.e. within sixty days from the beginning of a liquidation procedure or a status change. The annual accounts prepared for shorter periods are delivered until the end of the next month or upon the expiry of the last month of the accounting period. The Managing Board of the company delivers copies of the approved financial reports accompanied by the annual reports of the company to the Annual Account Register at the Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia, not more than 30 days from the day of their approval, but not later than 30of June. Trade companies have an obligation to deliver consolidated annual accounts and report on the activity for the previous year to the Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia not later then 31March of the following year. If the companies do not meet these obligations within the prescribed deadlines, according to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No. 28/04,) they will be held responsible for misdemeanour subject to penalty in the amount from 50.000 to 150.000 MKD for legal entities, and 10.000 up to 50.000 MKD for the responsible person in legal entity. In addition to the penalty, provisional measure for prohibition of performing activities is applied for period of three months to one year, and for the responsible person of the legal entity the provisional measure for prohibition of performing activity from in the period of three months to one year. We would like to highlight that according to the Article 477 Paragraph 5 of the Company Law, the company that fails to submit the annual account reports and financial reports to the Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia for a period of three subsequent years shall cease to exist by deleting it from the trade register and a liquidation procedure shall be initiated.   The percent of the trade companies (public and private) that have complied with the obligation to submit annual accounts to the Central Register of the Republic of Macedonia is as follows: in 2002 (65,125%) in 2003 (64,494%) Delivered annual accounts by the public and private limited liability companies in the business years of 2002 and 2003 have been prepared according to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of  RM” No.28/96, 7/97, 21/98, 37/98, 63/98, 39/99, 81/99, 37/2000, 31/01, 50/01, 6/02, 61/02 and 51/03) which was in force until 07.05.2004, when the new Company Law entered into force. The obligation of the existing and newly established companies according to the Company Law (“Official Gazette of RM” No 28/04) is foreseen to be in force after the end of business year 2004. Concerning the data for existing trade companies in 2002 and 2003 year, we would like to point your attention to the fact that according to the Company Law, trade companies with blocked accounts which have been transferred to the relevant institution for blocked accounts, are deleted from the trade register in the procedure prescribed by the law, if within six months of the day when this law entered into force (the deadline expired on 08.10.2004) they do not unblock their account. 
8. Please identify the administrative or judicial authority responsible for the incorporation of companies. 
The courts are responsible for the registration of companies in the Republic of Macedonia.  The registration in the trade register is performed by the competent court depending on the address of the company’s premises. The Basic Court Skopje I Skopje is responsible for the area of the Court of Appeal in Skopje, the Basic Court Bitola for the area of the Court of Appeal in Bitola and the Basic Court Stip for the area of the Court of Appeal in Stip. The joint trade register is within responsibility of the Basic Court Skopje I Skopje for the territory of the Republic of Macedonia. The trade register maintains unique evidence of companies and collects registered company data from other competent courts for trade registers. 
