17/04/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 17/04/09 
After weeks of joint preparation on Croatian training grounds, a group of 12 Croatian and 12 US military instructors has deployed to Afghanistan, where they will train the national army. The group will be based in Mazar-e-Sharif, in the north of the country, under the command of Croatian Major Ivan Galovic, a career military man. 
"We are fully aware of the risk and our responsibility. ... This is why we trained so much as we want to cut down the risk to the minimum," Galovic said at a press conference in Gasinci before the team left. 
He said members want to contribute to peace and security in Afghanistan by helping their Afghan colleagues, who need more training and strategy. 
All 12 members of the Croatian half of the Operational Mentoring Liaison Team (OMLT) gained their military experience during the 1990s conflict in Croatia. Most have previously served in Afghanistan, so they know the country well. The Croatian soldiers who joined the ISAF mission in Afghanistan mostly trained in Germany -- this is the first time they trained at home. 
The US component of the team is part of the Minnesota Army National Guard and gained its experience in Iraq, Afghanistan and Kosovo. Its members spent months training in Croatia and have befriended their Croatian colleagues. 
In late February, the group staged a situation exercise to simulate a combat situation. Lieutenant General Mladen Kruljac, commander of the Croatian Army, and US Army Colonel Charles Davis, head of the defence co-operation department of the US military delegation in Croatia, attended the drill. 
Kruljac described the exercise as the crown of co-operation between the Croatian Army and the Minnesota Army National Guard, adding that he expects the joint mission in Afghanistan to succeed. 
Croatia, a new NATO member, has been contributing to ISAF in Afghanistan since 2001. In the past eight years, 530 Croatian soldiers have served in Afghanistan. This is the first time, however, that they will serve on a joint mission there with US soldiers. 
