09/07/2009
Photos and text by Ema Kovac for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 09/07/09
Nestled in Mostar in the heart of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Muslibegovic House is a nifty getaway and national monument all rolled into one. 
The noble Muslibegovic family established themselves in Mostar at the end of the 17th century following the fall of Herceg Novi to the Venetians in 1687. The house has remained in the family for hundreds of years, and today is owned by Tadzudin and Zehra Muslibegovic. 
The house showcases antiques from the Ottoman period such as old books -- printed in Turkish, Persian and Arabic -- Bosnian handkerchiefs, waistbands, napkins, purses, bed covers, socks, medallions, sofas, lamps, Anatolian kilims and tapestries. 
A gate leads into a spacious garden outside the house, which is chock-full of various flowers, plants, herbs, palm, Japanese apple trees and medlar (musmula) trees. 
Visitors can take a guided tour. 
There are a lot of agricultural and historical treasures to explore in Mostar, so if you plan to spend a couple of days, and want to live like nobility, Muslibegovic is an ideal location. After having a cup of coffee in the shady garden, head out on the cobbled streets to see what the city has to offer. 
Overnight rates vary -- this summer a single room costs about 50 euros per night, a twin/double about 85 euros and a so-called pasha suite costs 95 euros. Before you trek down to Muslibegovic, use their online tool to make sure they have a room available (Muslibegovic House). 
The house is also set up to host weddings and conferences. 
You can find Muslibegovic House near Stari Most, or the "Old Bridge", that crosses the Neretva River. Every summer at the end of July there is a bridge diving competition there -- a tradition, according to legend, that has been going on for more than 440 years. 
You might even want to document your trip, as did Turkish historian Evlija Celebija. "The bridge looks like the arch of rainbow that rises to the Milky Way," he wrote 
