27/04/2011
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 27/04/11
Most of Macedonia's top companies are managed by men, but women are increasingly making inroads in the world of what they term "elite" business. 
"A business will not be given to you by anybody. To be successful, you must believe in yourself, have leadership skills, work hard and have a good business plan," businesswoman Snezana Jovanovska told SETimes. 
Jovanovska owns the tourist agency "Orpheus" and also heads the Macedonian Chamber of Commerce's tourist group. 
Last year, Orpheus Travel celebrated its 20th anniversary, proving to the thousands of customers that the leadership drive and the product offered are the two most important things, Jovanovska said. 
Marija Geras Docovska, owner and director of the business consulting firm Multiimpeks, says that while the number of women business owners is low -- close to 10% -- half of the firms she co-operates with are owned or managed by highly educated intellectual women. 
"Like in most European states, women in Macedonia are torn between the tradition to raise a family and the entrepreneurial opportunities. From a political aspect as well as gender equality point of view, there are no barriers and the environment is excellent. My 19-year experience confirms that," Docovska told SETimes. 
To be a woman in business however, requires support from the family and good organisation, she added. 
Macedonia passed a Law on Gender Equality and legal provisions for greater involvement of women in politics, yet there is not a single woman mayor. Women share the notion that nothing can be improved on paper unless specific entrepreneurial initiatives are undertaken. 
Some, like Jovanovska, believe women themselves are responsible for the current lack of female directors of top firms, given the required family raising trade offs. In her case, she made a decision to focus on business and has added to her portfolio the managing of the Italian shoe company Baldinini. 
Another entrepreneur, Divna Jordanovska, owner and director of Chekorov winery, says that everybody -- men or women -- is an architect of their own success. 
"There is no problem to work with men if you gain their trust. It does not bother me that my job is mostly considered 'a man's job' because success depends on ability, not on gender," Jordanovska told SETimes. 
Once people saw the results of her work, initial reservations disappeared and work continued smoothly. "I have many years of experience in collaboration mostly with men and I never had a bad experience," Jordanovska said. 
Skopje daily Dnevnik economics editor Mirce Jovanovski argued Macedonia is not much different from most countries, at least when it comes to women filling top positions of the biggest companies. "But here it is worse," he said. 
Yet, Jovanovski acknowledges the situation in Macedonia is changing as women increasingly gain ground. "There are women in top positions in the banking sector, food industry, the media, advertising, the pharmaceutical sector ... in a very competitive environment," he said. 
What remains is for the biggest companies to recognise women's qualities and offer them the very top positions, Jovanovski concluded.
