27/07/2006
(Blic - 27/07/06; AP, UPI, RFE/RL, Beta, Blic, Serbian Government - 26/07/06; AP, Ireland Online, Beta, Radio B92 - 25/07/06)
Concrete operational steps implementing Serbia's action plan for full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) were being drawn up on Thursday (27 July), according to a senior Belgrade official. 
Representatives of the interior ministry, Security Intelligence Agency and Military Security Agency would establish "a mutual operation plan for finalisation of co-operation with The Hague tribunal," Rasim Ljajic, chairman of Serbia's National Council for Co-operation with the ICTY, told the Belgrade-based daily Blic on Wednesday. 
"The operational plan shall elaborate each item of the action plan. Bodies working on implementation of these items shall also be set up. Complete control over actions of all operational bodies shall be established," Ljajic said. He added that Belgrade would, "on a regular basis," inform the UN tribunal and the EU about steps that are being taken. 
Shortly after Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica presented the action plan to EU officials on 17 July, the government appointed Ljajic and special war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic as those responsible for supervising and overseeing the plan's implementation. On Tuesday, Interior Minister Dragan Jocic said over 574,000 euros in additional funding had been set aside for war crimes prosecution. 
The implementation of the plan is expected to lead to the arrest and extradition to The Hague of ICTY indictees still at large, including former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic, whose initial war crimes indictment dates back to 1995. The fugitive, who along with former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, tops the UN tribunal's list of most wanted indictees, has been charged with genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo. 
During a visit Wednesday, US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Clint Williamson welcomed adoption of the action plan, saying the Serbian government "has sent a clear message… that it is taking its obligations seriously". But he also urged Belgrade to ensure that its declared will to meet international obligations translates into action. 
Full co-operation with the ICTY is a key condition for Serbia's progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration. In early May, the EU suspended talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Belgrade following its failure to make good on its promise to deliver Mladic to The Hague tribunal by 30 April. 
"The plans and the commitments are made," the AP quoted Williamson as saying Wednesday after meetings with senior officials, including Kostunica and President Boris Tadic. "Now is the time for Serbia to take action and to achieve full co-operation with the tribunal. Let us not forget that Mladic is accused of supervising the mass murder of thousands of unarmed people. Unless Serbia closes this dark chapter, it cannot move swiftly into the future its citizens deserve," he said. 
