16/07/2010
By Elisabeth Maragoula for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 16/07/10
In approving tough legislation aimed at overhauling the country's finances, the Greek government is proving that it is willing to take its prescribed medicine. 
 "The government has a huge opportunity to liberalise the economy and provide new sources of growth, instead of consumption," Yannis Stournaras, general-director of the Foundation for Economic and Industrial Research in Athens, told SETimes. 
 Lawmakers voted 156-128 in favour of a public-sector pension reform bill Thursday (July 15th), the Athens News Agency (ANA) reported. This comes one week after they approved a controversial bill that will curb early retirement, slash pensions and ease labour regulations for employers in the private sector. 
The official retirement age is 65 in Greece, but early retirement is widespread, with the average age of 62.4 for men and 60.9 for women, according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
Moreover, pensioners in Greece receive generous returns -- 96% of their gross earnings -- compared to the OECD average of 59%. 
In a country where wages and social benefits constitute 75% of total government expenditures, according to IMF data, the "welfare state" system is no longer sustainable. 
 Prime Minister George Papandreou is leading Greece forward with an economic adjustment programme, viewed as the country's one-way road towards fiscal health. 
 The economy is "absolutely" moving in the right direction, Stournaras said. 
"There is no other way," Giorgos Glynos, research fellow at Eliamep, the Hellenic Foundation for European and Foreign Policy, told SETimes. 
The austerity measures are required to receive an EU-IMF emergency aid package of 110 billion euros to address the debt crisis -- a deal that most Greeks feel is unfair. 
Facing lower incomes, fewer opportunities and higher taxes, many are outraged. They say they are being forced to pay for the country's previous financial and political missteps. 
Workers staged another paralysing nationwide strike against the reforms Thursday. Protests have been common this year, and three people died in May when one demonstration turned violent. 
Despite the dissent, analysts say Greeks will make the necessary adjustments, as it is the only option. 
"They're all unhappy because they have all been affected negatively, but they understand that there is no other way out," Stournaras said. Without external assistance, Greece would have had to clean up its 300 billion-euro debt alone. Such a situation would have seriously jeopardised the euro, among other problems. 
Harsh decisions had to be made, and the immediate effects are readily visible. 
Shops are shutting down. Homes are going up for rent. 
People are staying in, or travelling on smaller budgets. Companies are cutting costs and firing workers. "The difficult times for Greece are ahead," Ioannis Michaletos, an Athens-based strategic analyst, told SETimes. 
 Unemployment reached 11.9% in April, ANA reported, and is forecast by the IMF to peak at nearly 15% in 2012. Concern is also being raised over the government's ability to maintain the new policy. 
 "The real problem ... is the credibility of the political system," Glynos said. 
Papandreou has taken a 180-degree turn from the socialist platform of his PASOK party, angering some members. 
"All these things [austerity measures] are in conflict with what he said during the pre-election campaign ... but he proved to be flexible." Stournaras said. 
 Earlier this year, in a strong push for solidarity in support of the programme, the prime minister threw out several MPs who voted against it. 
 "The number one task for any leader would be to save his country from disaster," Stournaras noted. 
Given the climate, many would argue Papandreou has his work cut out for him. 
