24/07/2006
(Rompres, Nine o'Clock, Bucharest Daily News - 24/07/06; AP, Reuters, DPA, RFE/RL - 21/07/06)
Romanian State Prosecutor Ilie Botos on Friday (21 July) became the country's fourth senior official to resign following the disappearance of a terrorism suspect. 
Syrian-born Omar Hayssam, who is accused of masterminding the March 2005 kidnapping of three Romanian journalists in Iraq, was released from jail in late April because he had colon cancer and needed special treatment not available in the prison health system. Following his failure to appear for several trial hearings in the case, however, a Bucharest court issued a warrant for his arrest. 
It then emerged that Hayssam, who had been banned from leaving the country, had gone missing. 
After a meeting with President Traian Basescu, Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI) head Radu Timofte, Foreign Intelligence Agency (SIE) head Gheorghe Fulga and the General Department of Internal Information and Protection head Virgil Ardelean submitted their resignations on Thursday. 
Facing criticism over his handling of the case, Botos followed suit Friday without citing a specific reason for his move and his resignation was immediately accepted by Basescu. "I have personal reasons for resigning, I was not forced to do so," Reuters quoted Romania's now former chief prosecutor as telling the private television station Realitatea TV. "I quit after making a thorough assessment over the past days ... Today, I met prosecutors involved in the case," Botos said, adding that Hayssam left the country. 
All four officials who resigned last week were appointed to their posts by Romania's previous left-wing government. 
Basescu, who must under the constitution nominate the new heads of the SRI and SIE, has called a meeting of the Romanian Supreme Defence Council on Monday to discuss the issue. The nominees need to be approved by parliament. Until the appointment of new intelligence service heads, SRI will be run by First-Deputy Director Lieutenant Colonel Mihai Florian Coldea and SIE by Deputy Director Major General Silviu Predoiu, Romanian news agency Rompres reported. Ardelean's replacement must be appointed by the government. 
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu issued a statement Friday describing the resignations of the three officials as an opportunity "for reforming and making the institutions more professional". 
According to Interior Minister Vasile Blaga, who was among those criticising Botos over the Hayssam case, the intelligence services had not been asked to monitor the controversial businessman following his release from jail. 
Meanwhile, the leader of the main opposition Social Democratic Party expressed disapproval over the simultaneous resignations of the heads of the three intelligence chiefs. "Romania is facing a deep crisis of its national security system," Mircea Geoana said, calling also for the resignations of Blaga and Justice Minister Macovei, whose ministry is in charge of the Rahova Penitentiary, where Hayssam was kept. 
