06/02/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 06/02/07 
Albania and new EU member Bulgaria asked the European Commission (EC) last week to consider resuming the operation of the two closed units of a Bulgarian nuclear power plant. 
In the beginning of January, Bulgaria closed down two reactors at its Kozloduy nuclear power plant, located in the northwest of the country, because of EU concerns about the units' safety. However, the closures not only meant sacrificing lucrative energy exports, but have exacerbated winter energy shortages across the region. 
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha and his visiting Bulgarian counterpart, Sergey Stanishev, made the appeal at their meeting in Tirana on January 29th. The officials said reactivating the units would bring relief to Albania, which has been enduring power cuts ranging from 5 to 14 hours a day. 
Albania is heavily dependent on hydropower and imported electricity. This year, lack of rain and decreased power exports from its Balkan neighbours have plunged the country into darkness. 
"As a result of the fast economic development, our region needs increased energy sources," Berisha said. 
"Before Bulgaria's accession in the EU we tried to inform the EU regarding the impacts due to the closure of the reactors," he said. "We repeat our appeal to Brussels to reconsider this task for Bulgaria, which in fact damages the whole regional energy market. We hope our voice will be heard, and the reactors continue to work until we find alternative new sources of energy." 
"Bulgaria doesn't have the capacity to help Albania if the two units remain closed," Stanishev said. "The impacts of reactors' closure will be seen not only in Albania, but also in the other neighbouring countries. I think the countries of the region should inform the EC regarding the impacts of the closure on power capacities and, as a result, on economic development." 
Bulgaria has been one of the main exporters of energy to Southeast Europe. The Kozloduy reactors had been operating since 1980, with their initial cost having been paid off. 
