07/09/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 07/09/07
The meeting Wednesday (September 5th) between Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat was the first discussion between them in more than a year. 
 In July 2006, the two leaders agreed to start two-layer negotiations. Technical committees were to handle day-to-day issues, while working groups would discuss substantive questions. However, little progress has been made since then. 
During Wednesday's meeting, Papadopoulos said the proposed technical committees are "vital" to preparing the way for substantive peace negotiations aimed at reunification of the island. He rejected a proposal by Talat that the two leaders should spearhead the negotiations, and he warned the Turkish Cypriot leader not to "short circuit" the work of the preparatory committees. 
"We have suggested quick resumption of comprehensive negotiations and introducing a deadline of late 2008 for reaching a settlement, but Papadopoulos rejected this proposal," Talat told reporters after the meeting. 
"The Greek Cypriot side is not psychologically ready to start fully fledged negotiations," Talat added. "I can't say whether there is a sea between us or an ocean. Nobody knows how long these meetings of the technical committees will continue -- 14 months, 14 years or 140 years." 
At a separate press conference, Papadopoulos said the Turkish was trying to undermine efforts for a solution. He said Talat's idea of quickly resuming substantive peace negotiations rather than focusing on technical committees would only lead to an "early deadlock". 
The two sides did agree to conduct follow-up talks through the UN in the coming days, to determine the details of the technical committees. "They agreed to continue their contact through the UN and to meet again when appropriate," UN resident representative in Cyprus Michael Moeller said. The leaders "agreed on the need for the earliest start for the process" and "discussed other issues leading to a comprehensive settlement", he added. 
Papadopoulos is up for re-election in February 2008, and has been criticised by rivals for not doing enough to achieve a settlement. 
Cyprus has been divided since 1974, when Turkey's militarily intervened in response to a coup by a group of Greek officers, who were pushing for union between Cyprus and Greece. In 1983, the Turkish Cypriots declared themselves an independent state, but the move has been recognised only by Turkey. 
The internationally recognised Republic of Cyprus joined the EU in May 2004, claiming to represent the island as a whole. A month prior to that, Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected the UN-sponsored Annan Plan -- the last major effort for the unification of the island. 
Turkish Cypriots, in a separate referendum in April 2004, voted in favour of the plan, which had to be endorsed by both sides in order for a reunified Cyprus to enter the EU. 
The Cyprus issue remains a source of tension between NATO allies Greece and Turkey, and the stalemate in the peace process has hampered Turkey's EU bid. In December 2006, Brussels froze the opening of eight of 35 negotiating chapters because of a Cyprus-related impasse. 
Ankara says it will not open its ports to traffic from the Greek Cypriot-administered part of the island until a comprehensive settlement is reached. The Republic of Cyprus, however, has veto power over Turkey's accession process, and says it will continue to push for compliance by Ankara. 
