14/03/2011
(Kyodo, Deutsche Welle, Euobserver, EurActiv, Euroalert.net, Dnevnik.bg, FOCUS News Agency, Standart - 14/03/11; Deutsche Welle, RFE/RL, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg, Emportal - 13/03/11; VOA, BBC - 12/03/11; International Atomic Energy Agency -- 11/03/11 - 14/03/11)
EU environment ministers are expected to discuss possible consequences for Europe stemming from the nuclear crisis in Japan on Monday (March 14th), following last week's devastating earthquake and tsunami. 
Ahead of the meeting in Brussels, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed a second explosion in as many days at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant, about 250km northeast of Tokyo. Citing Japan's Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency, the IAEA said a hydrogen explosion had occurred earlier Monday at the plant's unit 3 reactor, which left six people injured. A day after an 8.9-magnitude quake rocked Japan on Friday, triggering a 10m-high tsunami, a similar blast blew the roof off the nuclear facility's unit 1 reactor. 
While Japanese experts have been racing against time to prevent a full-scale meltdown at the reactors, concerns have been growing among Europeans about the safety of nuclear plants on the Old Continent. They still remember the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear accident, as a result of which a radiation cloud spread to most of Europe. 
The responsibility for ensuring nuclear power stations' safe operation lies primarily with the 14 EU nations that use atomic energy, the Sofia-based daily Dnevnik quoted EU Energy Commissioner Guenther Oettinger as telling Germany's Deutschlandfunk radio on Monday. 
The nuclear crisis in Japan, the second worst since the Chernobyl disaster, has changed the world, he also noted. 
In the wake of Saturday's huge anti-nuclear rally in Stuttgart, where protestors formed a 45km human chain, the German commissioner would not rule out the possible closure of some of the older reactors in his country. 
On Sunday, Austrian Environment Minister Nikolaus Berlakovich said he would raise the issue of the safety of European nuclear plants at Monday's meeting in Brussels. He also told reporters that he would request that those facilities be subjected to "stress tests" to assess their resistance to earthquakes, as well as "the state of their cooling system and reactor confinement". 
Bulgaria has one active nuclear power plant at Kozloduy on the Danube River and is planning to build a second one about 100km to the east, at Belene. Experts are working to allay fears that the country may face a crisis like that in Japan. 
While the existing 2,000MW plant is situated in an active seismic zone, the site of the future facility is considered even more prone to earthquakes. 
Bulgarian experts have stressed however, that the possible meltdown and the hydrogen explosions at the Fukushima Daiichi plant were not caused by Friday's quake, but by the tsunami it triggered, the Sofia News Agency reported. 
Economy and Energy Minister Traicho Traikov told reporters at the weekend that the Kozloduy plant has been designed to withstand earthquakes with a magnitude of up to 7 points on the Richter scale, and that the one at Belene -- if built -- would have the same resistance capacity. 
