17/12/2007
By Dimitar Bocevski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 17/12/07
Drinking alcohol has long been considered a normal part of life in Balkan culture, and males -- including minors -- see it as a "test of manhood". So, it's not exactly a surprise that alcoholism is growing among youth in Macedonia. 
Twelve-year-olds can be found drinking on a regular basis, and a 13-year-old recently became the youngest alcoholic to be treated at a rehabilitation centre in the country. The traditional "gender gap" is disappearing also. These days, juvenile females often outdrink the boys. 
On weekends, some of these youthful drinkers finish the night at the Toxicology Clinic at the Clinical Centre in Skopje. Clinic director Andon Chibishev is alarmed by what he sees. "Irreversible damage to the central nervous system, liver damage and failure are only some of the results of drinking," he says. "Parents don't realize that the repercussions upon the children's health are catastrophic. We encourage them to seek psychiatric help, since after only one year of regular drinking, the children are addicts." 
"The parents often encourage their children to consume alcohol and do not perceive this as a problem," says Dr Omer Sulejmani, child psychiatrist at the Youth Mental Health Center in Bitola. "When asked about it, they state that it's not a 'big deal', and that at least the kids are not using drugs." 
Dr Saso Kocankovski, a psychotherapist at the same institution, thinks social anxieties are a key contributing factor. "Children believe that drinking will ease them into acceptance by their peers. It's best to work with them on self-confidence, rejection skills and crisis situation management in order for them to be successful in overcoming the problem." 
Macedonian law, alcohol consumption below 18 years age is prohibited, but IDs are often not checked at cafe bars, discotheques, supermarkets and shops. In general, the law has little effect. 
 "Co-operation between police and inspection authorities on these matters is considered fair, but results have been very slim," says Vlado Kocovski, director of the State Market Inspectorate. The stipulated penalties are mild, and Macedonian courts are notoriously inefficient. The result is often a complete failure to prosecute violators. 
"We usually have couple of drinks, whenever we can on weekdays and almost always on weekend nights with our friends," admit 14-year-old twins Filip and Marko. "We drink beer, red and white wine, but we don't get drunk, just drink three or four glasses to keep our mood cheerful. Since it's expensive for most of our generation to go to cafe bars, we drink in parks during summers, and in winters we gather in building basements. Sometimes we go to someone's apartment, if the parents are not at home for the night. 
"Birthday parties and other youth celebrations is where we mostly get drunk. So do the girls, but they are much more careful not to get seen by adults while drinking. They prefer chocolate and mint liqueurs, red wine, vodka with juice and whiskey-Cola cocktails." 
For several years, the law has also prohibited advertising alcoholic beverages. Nevertheless, minors are surrounded by billboards and T V commercials promoting alcohol consumption. No penalties have been issued so far to any company. 
 Macedonia is hardly alone in the Balkans when it comes to alcohol among youth. The problem is just as serious elsewhere in the region. In Croatia, for instance, a study by the national health institute found 38% of male teenagers consume alcohol regularly, as do 16% of females. As in Macedonia, drinking starts early, at around 13. Furthermore, research shows that alcohol is often combined with other drugs, especially ecstasy. 
The high percentage of young Croatians who drink has put the country near the top of the list worldwide, immediately after Lithuania, Slovakia, Czech Republic, Estonia and Ukraine. No national strategy is in place to reverse the trend, so prevention happens only at school and within families. 
In Romania, meanwhile, lax implementation of the law means that any underage person who wants to try alcohol will face few barriers in doing so. According to a report by the organisation Save the Children, it is not uncommon for Romanian parents to send their teenage children to buy alcohol. Nine out of ten times, the transaction is made without any difficulties. 
Almost half of young people in Romania between the ages of 11 and 14 have tried alcohol at least once, the report found. Nevertheless, habitual consumption in this age group remains relatively infrequent -- only 4% say they drink regularly or more than once a week. Although the traditional cultural pattern is changing, girls still drink less regularly than boys. As in other Balkan countries, however, alcohol consumption is initially learned from the family, and the tendency to drink becomes stronger at parties and among groups of friends. 
While Romania has launched campaigns to prevent drug abuse and safe sex, no youth alcohol prevention campaigns have been undertaken. Society as a whole still remains disinclined to view the problem seriously, and this attitude is reflected in state policy. Over the long term, experts warn, the consequences and costs could be high. 
Natasa Radic and Alina Bandila also contributed to this report
