16/05/2006
(IMF - 15/05/06)
Albania's macroeconomic performance since the turn of the century generally has been good, but the economy still faces certain challenges, IMF experts said in a statement Monday (15 May) following a review of economic developments in the Balkan country. 
Economic growth, projected to stand at 5 per cent in 2006 and 6 per cent in 2007, has been rapid, and inflation has successfully been kept within the target range (3 per cent, plus or minus 1 per cent), the experts said. 
"These positive developments owe much to sound frameworks for fiscal and monetary policies," the IMF statement added, pointing also to measures aimed at containing net domestic borrowing and lowering public debt. 
At the same time, it warned that the economy "remains vulnerable on several fronts because of a culture of tax evasion, large and short-term domestic public debt, poorly regulated and supervised non-bank financial institutions, and weak anti-money laundering and countering the financing of terrorism capacities." 
The statement presents the conclusions of the IMF mission that visited Albania to conduct regular consultations with the government under Article IV of the Fund's Articles of Agreement and the first review under two concurrent three-year arrangements. The IMF approved the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) and the Extended Fund Facility (EFF) in late January in support of the Albanian government's economic reform and poverty reduction programme. The approval of the two arrangements, amounting to a total of about $24.7m, allowed Albania to immediately draw the first tranche of about $3.5m. 
Recent consultations with the government focused on the medium-term strategic issues facing the country, the IMF explained. The international experts and Albanian authorities agreed that maintaining macroeconomic stability and furthering fiscal reform with a view to enhance revenue collection were among the key goals the country should focus on in the coming years. Other priorities include strengthening debt management and simplifying the tax system, containing credit growth, broadening the export base, improving conditions in the electricity sector and undertaking a wide range of institutional reforms. 
"Under the IMF programme, the quantitative and structural performance criteria -- except those related to (Albania's power utility) KESH -- were met," the IMF statement said. 
Noting that KESH has failed to meet the collection and loss rates targets set for the first quarter of 2006, the Fund's experts called for further efforts to bring the utility's financial performance back on track. They also recommended measures to avert potential risks in other areas. 
According to the IMF, Albania still needs to implement further major reforms to catch up with middle-income countries. "To sustain high growth with macroeconomic stability and create the conditions for a significant expansion of the export sector, the quality of public and private institutions will have to improve," said its experts. "Reforms that help reduce corruption, formalise the economy, and make the business environment more inviting are essential." 
