11/05/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 11/05/12
NATO is transforming, but it will continue to achieve balance and security in Southeast Europe, Allied Forces Heidelberg HQ Commander Lieutenant General John Morgan said on Thursday (May 10th), at the close of the 7th Allied Chiefs of Army Staff Talks and Land Commanders Conference, which was held in Tirana. 
Chiefs of army staffs from 26 NATO member nations -- including Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Croatia, Turkey, and Slovenia -- attended. Ten Partnership for Peace countries sent representatives as well, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia and Macedonia. 
Two Mediterranean Dialogue and two Istanbul Co-operation Initiative countries also participated in the three-day session. 
Force Command Heidelberg public affairs adviser Lieutenant Colonel Götz Haffke told SETimes that the security threats in the region were much higher years ago. "We have peace and stability in the region, but there are still security threats," Haffke said. 
Last week, NATO proactively sent additional troops in Kosovo ahead of the Serb elections, based on the vote’s potential security impact in Kosovo's north. 
"There were reinforcements sent to be there in case [they were] needed," Haffke said. 
He noted the transformation of the NATO Izmir base as one of the upcoming changes. Last summer, the Alliance announced it will turn the air base in Turkey's port city of Izmir into a land command -- one of the 11 Alliance bases that will be revamped -- to cut costs and duplication. 
"Next summer, they will be ready for the initial operational capacity. It will take a while; it's part of the overall NATO transformation," Haffke told SETimes. 
Brigadier General Viktor Berdo, commander of the Albanian Land Forces, told reporters that the focus of the discussion was on finding new solutions -- based on the new strategic concept of NATO and the "Smart Defence" concept -- for better use of defence resources. 
One way to accomplish this, according to Albanian Armed Forces' Lieutenant Colonel Fredi Maksuti, would be to create regional battalion units, allowing the countries involved to share expenses and troops. 
Maksuti told SETimes that this would have a positive impact on neighbourly relations in the region. 
He said Albania would like to assist other countries in the region in becoming NATO members, through training and joint exercises -- but also through the creation of joint capacities. 
Maksuti says that the recent developments in Kosovo, Macedonia and Presevo Valley are political, and are not for comment by the military. 
"Security should be guaranteed, and there should be dialogue between the neighbours," Maksuti tells SETimes. 
Morgan underlined that these meetings are an opportunity for NATO members, partners, command structure and force structure to discuss the capability of the Alliance’s land force. 
"These meetings serve to foster dialogue and strengthen ties between NATO military authorities and partners," the Alliance said. 
The next meeting of the chiefs of army staffs will be held next year. 
