17/05/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 17/05/13
Albanians in Presevo Valley are asking for rights equal to Kosovo Serbs, but opinions on how to achieve that differ. 
During a peaceful demonstration last week, the minority group urged Serbian authorities to give them guaranteed rights and not to use a double standard for the two minority groups. 
Presevo Valley in Southern Serbia is the centre of Albanians living in Serbia. They are an overwhelming majority of the population in Presevo, they make up 50 percent of the population in Bujanovac and are 25 percent of the population in Medvedja. More than 60,000 Albanians live in the valley. 
"We support our position on the rights that are being guaranteed to the Serbs in Kosovo. We are asking for the same rights," Ramiz Latifi, the chairman of Presevo municipal council, told SETimes. 
Latifi said that if their rights are not guaranteed, Presevo politicians could change their position. Albanian political leaders in the valley have been submitting requests to Serbian authorities for solutions based on dialogue, peaceful means and co-operation with Belgrade authorities. 
A change in their political reaction could vary from less co-operation with Belgrade authorities to asking for an international force to be stationed in the valley. 
The Albanian members of the municipal councils in Presevo Valley, Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovac compiled a document in March asking Belgrade to find solutions for issues such as security, economic issues, use of language and symbols and the decentralisation of courts. 
They also asked that, based on the model of northern Kosovo, an association of Albanian municipalities in Serbia be established. 
Jonuz Musliu, the chairman of the Democratic Progress Movement, said Presevo citizens have been asking for solutions to the problems of the Albanians in this area since 2001. He said the Koncujl agreement, which ended the conflict between the Liberation Army for Presevo, Medvedje and Bujanovac and the government forces, has not been implemented. 
"The voice of the Albanians in the valley has not been taken into consideration. If the Albanians are not given their rights, the situation will radicalise," Musliu told SETimes. 
The majority of the Albanians in Presevo Valley want their rights be respected and guaranteed, but not everyone agrees that radicalisation is the way to achieve this. 
Besnik Sadiku, a teacher in Presevo, said the Albanians there have long supported a political, peaceful solution. 
"A small part is for radicalisation, but the majority has defined its position in support of a political solution. They have shown that by participating in the elections and becoming part of the system in which we live. Radicalisation would not serve anyone here," Sadiku told SETimes. 
Sadiku said the issue of the rights for Albanians in the valley should have been part of the talks between Pristina and Belgrade. 
Shkumbin Rexhepi, a dentist in Presevo, agreed. 
"I believe that time for radicalism is over. Everything should be solved through dialogue. If our political factors would be united, it would be easier," Rexhepi told SETimes. 
Dren Doli, a researcher for the Kosovo Group for Legal and Political Studies in Pristina, said Serbia should adopt minority protection mechanisms with regard to the Albanian minority in Presevo Valley and other ethnic groups living in Serbia. 
Through this action, Serbia will offer sufficient proof that it is prepared to change and willing to adopt EU values, Doli told SETimes. "Of course, in this respect, Kosovo provides a valuable example as to the constitutional protection of the rights of ethnic minorities and its members." 
It is essential for Pristina to put pressure on the Serbian government to extend the necessary rights and constitutional guarantees for ethnic Albanians living in Serbia, he said. 
"This can be best achieved through diplomatic means. Of course, due to the importance that the protection of ethnic minorities has vis-à-vis the European perspective of the Western Balkan countries, Kosovo can insist that any forthcoming walk of Serbia to the EU should be coupled with the constitutional guarantees for Albanian ethnic minority living in Presevo Valley," Doli said. 
How can Serbia guarantee rights for minorities? Tell us your thoughts in the comments below. 
