23/10/2006
(The Times, The Scotsman, The Herald - 23/10/06; The Observer, AFP, Reuters, FT, UPI, DPA - 22/10/06)
Britain is expected to unveil measures this week aimed at curbing the access of migrant workers from Bulgaria and Romania to its labour market, British press reports said Sunday (October 22nd). The two countries will join the bloc in January. 
Britain, Sweden and Ireland were the only EU member states to fully open their labour markets to migrant workers from the ten mostly former communist countries that joined the Union in May 2004. The British authorities' initial estimates were that no more than 13,000 Eastern European citizens would enter the UK. Recent reports suggest however, that the actual number exceeded 400,000 people. 
That sparked concerns that Bulgaria and Romania's entry into the EU will lead to thousands of new job seekers flooding the British labour market after January. Calls have come from unions, the opposition Conservatives and members of Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labour Party for the government to end its open-door policy. 
Following weeks of media speculation, British Home Secretary John Reid is expected to announce a number of planned steps. These include the introduction of time-limited controls on the right of Bulgarians and Romanians to work in Britain after the countries' EU entry, The Observer reported on Sunday. 
The authorities intend to allow only specialised workers to enter the British labour market, the report said. Even these would be issued temporary work permits. A limited number of unskilled Bulgarian and Romanian workers -- such as fruit pickers -- would have the opportunity to get seasonal jobs in Britain, but would not be offered a general right to work. 
Meanwhile, The Times said on Monday that the British government also is mulling measures to stop people from the two Balkan countries from entering the black economy. 
While there are no legal grounds for Britain to deny nationals of EU member states to move into the country, denying them work permits is expected to prevent a large-scale influx of migrant workers. 
"We should have roughly the same policy as the other main European countries so that we only take in the people who will benefit our economy," the AFP quoted Home Office Affairs spokesman Damian Green as saying. 
Many economists say the influx of East European workers has had a beneficial effect on the British economy, boosting economic growth over the past two years. But employers' unions warn that a new large wave of migrants could be hard to absorb. 
The reported measures have angered some in the two incoming EU member states. 
"We are deeply concerned about the denigrating campaign of the past weeks in the British media that does significant harm to the true image of Romania," The Observer quoted a group of senior Romanian figures as complaining in a letter to Blair. "The numbers of Romanians who intend to come to work in the UK after 1 January, 2007 has been highly exaggerated." 
Recent reports have suggested that Bulgarians and Romanians were more drawn to Italy and Spain, and to a lesser extent to Britain. 
