22/04/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/04/09
Thousands of professional and amateur runners hit the streets of Belgrade at the weekend in the city's 22nd annual marathon. The number of participants makes it reputedly the biggest marathon in the Balkans and most participatory sporting event in Serbia. 
Forty countries sent representatives to Belgrade for the Saturday (April 18th) event, including Kenya, whose runners dominated the race. 
The full marathon included 341 runners, while another 1,200 ran in the half-marathon. A 5km "Fun Run" attracted several thousand participants. 
Some ran to promote a good cause. Representatives of Belgrade's Vracar municipality, including municipality President Branimir Kuzmanovic, raised funds for a mother's milk bank by running in the half-marathon. Their supporters pledged contributions for each kilometre run by the Vracar team. 
"We have managed to collect nearly 11,000 euros and still need approximately 1,600," said Kuzmanovic after his race. 
The Kenyans dominated the full-length event with six among the top ten runners. Victor Kigen of Kenya won in his very first marathon. He told the Beta news agency afterwards he had not expected to win. However, "I was prepared," he said, adding that he enjoyed Belgrade's food and hospitality. 
A compatriot of Kigen's, Anne Kosgei, finished first among women and 25th overall. 
The host country -- Serbia -- was not left out of the winners' circle entirely. Olivera Jevtic won the women's half-marathon and became the first winner of the Djoko Vjestica trophy, in memory of the Belgrade Marathon co-founder, a journalist who died last year. 
The local government organised the city's first marathon in 1988 at the initiative of Vjestica and track-and-field enthusiast Brana Radovic. 
Sport and Youth Minister Snezana Samardzic-Markovic and Belgrade Mayor Dragan Djilas formally opened the race. Djilas said this and the other sporting events organised in Belgrade made it a true "city of sports". 
This year, Belgrade also hosted the 42nd World Military Marathon Championship, with participants from 22 countries. Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac said it was only "natural" to organise both competitions concurrently. 
