02/04/2010
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 02/04/10 
The song "Thunder and Lightning" that will represent Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) at the 2010 Eurovision Contest in Oslo is in many ways a typical rock tune about love. More than that, however, it can be interpreted as an invitation to reconciliation and unity for all the people of BiH. 
Vukasin Brajic, 26, sings the refrain: "This is the time to melt the ice/Off our lips and off our hearts/Thunder and lightning holding hands/Let's overcome the past/We have to do it fast." 
 Brajic premiered "Thunder and Lightning," live on March 14th in a special Eurosong Show on the BiH public broadcast service (BiHRT). It was performed in English by Brajic with lyrics by Edin-Dino Saran, Ulvija Tanovic and Brajic. 
 "I am happy, excited and honoured to represent my country at such a competition," said Brajic, after learning he was selected. 
According to a rule enforced in the last few years, the BiHRT picks the entry song for Eurovision through an internal selection process, weeding through dozens of songs submitted for consideration. 
Dejan Kukric, the chairman of the selection jury, said 60 songs were entered this year. 
 "Out of this number, 42 songs met the requirements to be heard. In the end, two songs remained in the running for the selection jury. We chose 'Thunder and Lightning'", explained Kukric. All performing artists must be BiH citizens, while the writers may be non-Bosnian. Though not a rule, performing artists are expected to represent a different ethnic background each year to satisfy all BiH Eurosong fans. 
Brajic is an ethnic Serb originally from the western Bosnian town of Sanski Most. His family left BiH in 1995 for Serbia and currently lives in the town of Cacak while the young singer studies at Negotin, Serbia. 
Brajic attracted a following on the popular reality and talent show "Operation Triumph", broadcast in Croatia, BiH, Montenegro, Serbia and Macedonia, with contestants representing each country. 
Lyricist Saran, 41, from Sarajevo, is currently the front man of the BiH rock band "Letu stuke", which has gained cross-regional popularity in the past ten years. 
Saran is not only the lead vocal, but also writes songs for the band. He is one of the most respected songwriters in BiH and Croatia. 
 "It was hard to fine tune the sensibility of the song because it is not an easy song to perform," said Brajic. "But ... I am ready and I'll do my best in Oslo." 
BiH will compete in the first semifinals on May 25th, performing during the first half of the draw. 
In February, it was rumoured that BiH's participation at Eurovision might be jeopardised due to a considerable debt -- nearly 2m euros -- owed to the European Broadcasting Union. Kukric, of the BiHRT, dismissed the speculation and says BiH will participate as planned. 
Jusuf Ramadanovic contributed to this article.  
