24/03/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 24/03/09
The OSCE Mission in Macedonia, the Office for Democratic and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR), the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly (OSCE/PA) and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) declared at a press conference Monday (March 23rd) that the first round of the presidential and municipal elections in Macedonia "met most international standards". 
Election Day was peaceful, while the elections were "well administered", they said. The voting process, despite some "procedural irregularities", was "generally well managed". 
The Council of Europe's Congress of Local and Regional Authorities, which observed the local elections, concurred. So did the civic association MOST ("Bridge"), which traditionally observes elections and deployed the greatest number of observers ever for Macedonian balloting -- 3,750. 
Peter Eicher, head of the OSCE/ODIHR's long-term election observation mission, expressed satisfaction that Macedonia had made a "number of steps along the democratic road". However, while this is an important first step, the OSCE/ODIHR will be watching for continued progress in the second round, he said. 
Macedonia must address "irregularities and a lack of trust", said OSCE/PA Vice-President Pia Christmas-Moller, special co-ordinator appointed to lead the short-term OSCE observer mission. 
For example, some experts think the country needs to review its voter rolls, saying it is unrealistic for a country of slightly over 2 million people to have 1.8 million voters. 
That said, Macedonia made "progress in holding elections according to international commitments", continued Christmas-Moller. 
US Ambassador to Macedonia Philip Reeker praised the government and the electoral commission for their efforts to organise fair and democratic elections. He also credited the voters for turning out in large numbers. This way, the Macedonians "showed their expectations as citizens of this democracy", Reeker said. 
From Brussels, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn concurred with Reeker. 
Summoning a sports metaphor, Rehn compared the first election round to semi-finals, with finals or run-offs two weeks away. He added he expects fair play and conformance with international standards on April 5th. 
