30/08/2007
By Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 30/08/07
The 13th Sarajevo Film Festival (SFF) wrapped up on Saturday (August 25th). The week-long event, featuring 176 movies from 30 countries, was attended by around 100,000 people. Organisers say this year's festival was one of the best to date. 
A Turkish film about a strict Muslim whose life is thrown into turmoil when he gets entangled in religious corruption won the award for best movie. Ozer Kiziltan is the director of the film, entitled "Man's Fear of God (Takva)". 
The award came as a surprise to the filmmakers, who left Sarajevo before the festival ended. At the Saturday night closing ceremony, co-producer Fatih Akin accepted the 25,000-euro prize on behalf of his colleagues. 
"We didn't expect [to win]," he said. 
Turkey made a strong overall showing at this year's event. A Turkish actress, Saadet Isil Aksoy, won the best actress award for her role in "Egg". 
The award for best actor, meanwhile, went to Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Sasa Petrovic, for his role in "It's Hard to Be Nice". The judges' panel was headed by British actor Jeremy Irons. 
The festival has come a long way. Originating in 1994, during the conflict in BiH, it was initially held in the basement of the Sarajevo Performing Arts Academy. Since then it has grown to become one of the ten most important film festivals in Europe. 
 "[More than] 800 men and women worked hard to make sure that this year's programme is the best so far," said festival director Mirsad Purivatra. "The viewers will decide if we have succeeded, but I believe we have." 
A special Heart of Sarajevo Award for achievement in the movie industry and support to the festival was given to US actor and director Steve Buscemi. "When I came to Sarajevo for the first time, I saw it as an opportunity to make contacts, see the city and to give my support to the festival," Buscemi said upon receiving the prize. 
The special jury award went to Macedonian director Teona Strugar Mitevska for "I am from Titov Veles". A Romanian film, Adrian Sitaru's "Waves", won the prize for best short film, while "Hole", a Croatian-Slovenian co-production directed by Marko Santic, received a special mention. 
The human rights award went to Bulgarian director "The Mosquito Problem and Other Stories," directed by Bulgaria's Andrey Paounov. 
A source of pride for local audiences was the documentary award. It was won by BiH director Namik Kabil for his film "Interrogation ". A Serbian documentary, "Echo", got a special mention. 
Many internationally renowned actors and directors attended the festival, including Oscar-winning French star Juliette Binoche. She introduced British director Anthony Minghella's latest movie, "Breaking and Entering", in which Binoche plays the Bosnian mother of a troubled teen. 
 US director Michael Moore was also in attendance, and his newest film, "Sicko", was shown Saturday. "I'm really happy to be taking part in the festival, and I hope to watch some Bosnian movies," Moore said, telling local journalists that he had "always wanted to come to Sarajevo". 
This year's festival also saw an increase of media coverage -- more than 600 journalists were given accreditations for the festival. 
"This is proof that the Sarajevo Film Festival is becoming one of the most important cultural events in the region, and it is important that artists from the region are accepting this festival as their own," Merima Spahic, a journalist for the Serbian news agency Beta, said. 
