08/12/2010
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 08/12/10
Given its favourable geographical location, Macedonia has plenty of sun, wind and other natural resources needed to produce energy. Foreign and domestic investors have shown an interest in developing projects that can help make the most of those resources. 
Macedonia can theoretically secure 7% of its annual electricity needs by utilising wind as a source. In the country's eastern parts, 130 to 170 days per year are windy, with wind speed averaging 3.5m per second. That is sufficient to operate windmills with a capacity of 250kw. Wind reaches 8m per second on at least 100 days a year. 
 Because wind-based production qualifies as clean energy, it can help Macedonia meet EU environmental standards. 
Soncev Park (Sun Park) in the village of Kadino near Skopje is the country's first systematic attempt to make use of the sun and wind as alternative sources of energy. 
"The solar electrical plant in Kadino is the first of this kind in Macedonia, with a 10.2kw capacity and it already has been in operation for two years. Through a separate electric meter, the electricity is transferred to the firm EVN Macedonia," said Zvonko Markovski, director of the SIETO company, which operates the facility. 
A similar plant with a 50kw capacity began working in Radovis last month, while another two are being built in Belcista, near Ohrid. 
 "We plan to start building solar plants in the Bunardzik free economic zone, as well as in Sonje, both near Skopje," Markovski told SETimes. 
Macedonian electricity producer ELEM is also taking steps to utilise wind power as a way of reducing the country's dependence on imports. 
"ELEM is actively preparing to build the reservoir at Lukovo Pole and the hydroelectric plant at Boshkov Most, and we are already working on revitalising six existing hydro plants," company spokesman Mirce Kotevski told SETimes. "In addition, we are preparing to build a wind park near Bogdanci which will certainly bring about an increase in the share of renewable energy sources." 
The Bogdanci windmills will be built through a 33m-euro credit from Germany, and the project is in accordance with Macedonia's Strategy for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Sources of Energy. 
Deputy Prime Minister Zoran Stavrevski said the German government is helping to fund the construction of windmills at Bogdanci, providing 32.9m euros out of the needed 75m. Down the road, the government foresees such plants pumping out as many as 100 gigawatt hours annually. "
This project is ready and we expect -- in the first half of next year -- to conclude the deals for its realisation," Stavrevski said. 
The Business and Economics School at the University of Skopje, in co-operation with Germany's association for solar energy, has opened a School for Renewable Energies – the first such educational institution in Macedonia. 
The country's need for electricity increases 4% every year. It spends about 113m euros annually on overall energy imports, including 38m euros on electricity and 75m euros on oil. 
