24/06/2011
By Alexander Christie-Miller for the Southeast European Times in Khirbet al-Joz -- 24/06/11 
"We want Khirbet al-Joz to be part of Turkey," said Abdullah, a young smuggler, pointing to a Turkish flag fluttering in a treetop not far from the border. 
His friends had hung it there, reflecting a widespread hope among the displaced Syrians living in a makeshift encampment outside the village that the Turkish army will protect them from the forces of President Bashar al-Assad. 
Lying within sight of Turkish border guards, the camp is inhabited by about 3,500 people unwilling to abandon their lives and property by heading to refugee camps in Turkey, but too scared to go home. 
Two weeks ago, Damascus began a military crackdown in the region after claiming that "armed bandits" were behind the alleged massacre of 120 soldiers in the town of Jisr al-Shaghour. 
Since then, thousands have fled towns and villages near the Turkish border, with some 11,000 people, mainly women and children, now in camps inside Turkey. 
But as Syrian forces edge close to the border, those camped there are adding an uncertain element to relations between Ankara and Damascus, already strained by the Assad regime’s brutal response to pro-democracy demonstrations. 
From the Turkish border village of Guvecci, SETimes observed troops and personnel carriers in Khirbet al-Joz, as well as men in army dress with guns crouching on a rooftop, who local Syrians claimed were snipers. 
"Any military action on the border would totally cut off the already tense relationship between Turkey and Syria," said Gokhan Bacik, head of the Middle East Studies Centre at Zirve University in Gaziantep. 
But the encampment at Khirbet al-Joz, one of the few places on Syrian soil where dissidents can openly oppose the government without fear of arrest, has become a hotbed for Syria’s increasingly organized opposition movement. 
On Sunday, June 19th, activists in the camp announced a "National Council" to oppose the Assad regime. The previous day the Syrian army entered the town of Bdama, only 10km away, cutting off a vital supply line to the camp. 
Since, the sound of gunfire has been getting closer and on Wednesday, June 22th, activists said seven tanks and four troop carriers lay just two kilometres from the village. 
Many of those camped outside believe the Syrian military is bound by an agreement with Turkey not come close to the border. A Turkish Foreign Ministry spokesman said that no such agreement exists, but the Syrian army has not deployed on the border for more than two decades. 
Some in the camp claim Turkish military helicopters even entered Syrian airspace after Assad's forces moved into Bdama. 
"When the Syrian army entered Bdama, myself and other people saw two helicopters fly across from Turkey. When they were above the area the Syrian forces retreated," said Mahmud Moussa, 39, a school headmaster from Bdama. The Turkish Foreign Ministry denied the claim. 
Peter Bouckhaert, Emergencies Director for Human Rights Watch, who has been investigating the Syrian military crackdown in the area, believes a "standoff" is evolving. 
"It’s clear to us that the Turkish army has told the Syrian army that it cannot come into this last valley," he said. "There now is a pretty tense standoff between the Syrian army and the Turkish army about what will happen next." 
With no clean water supply in the camp and the main source of food now coming through Turkish smuggling routes, Turkey’s Red Crescent has started dropping aid at the border point. 
But with few displaced Syrians inclined to heed their government’s call to return home, it appears no easy solution is in sight. 
"I will only go home when Bashar Assad goes," said Anas, 22, from Jisr al-Shughour, who had a gunshot wound in his leg that he said he suffered when the bus he was travelling in was attacked by snipers. 
"But it will not be long I think, only two or three months at the most." 
