18/05/2005
(AP, Reuters, BBC, ICTY - 17/05/05) 
For the first time since its inception in 1993, the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has decided to refer one of its indictments to a national jurisdiction. Under the decision a three-judge panel at the UN tribunal took Tuesday (17 May), the case against former Bosnian Serb paramilitary Radovan Stankovic will be sent to Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) recently established war crimes chamber. 
 With the ICTY due to wrap up all its activities in 2010, tribunal officials have indicated in recent months that some mid- and low-ranking cases would be referred to national courts in the Balkans in a bid to relieve the court of its caseload, so that it can focus on the major suspects. There are more than 50 war crimes indictees currently awaiting trial at The Hague and about a dozen others are still at large, including the ICTY's two most wanted indictees, wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic. 
 "Neither the level of responsibility of the accused nor the gravity of the crimes alleged in the indictment were factors that would make a referral to the national authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina inappropriate," the ICTY said in a statement on Tuesday. 
Stankovic, 36, was initially indicted in 1996 along with seven others for war crimes he allegedly committed against Bosnian Muslims and Croats detained after Serb forces overtook Foca in April 1992. He was arrested by SFOR troops on 9 July 2002 and was transferred to The Hague the following day. In 2003, UN prosecutors filed a separate indictment against Stankovic, which was later amended. It charges him with four counts of crimes against humanity for enslavement and rape and four counts of violations of the laws or customs of war for rape and outrages upon personal dignity. 
According to UN prosecutors, at the beginning of the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH, Stankovic was serving as a soldier in the Miljevina Battalion of the Foca Tactical Brigade and was among a group temporarily quartered in the abandoned house of a Bosnian Muslim. Between August 1992 and October the same year, he and several other soldiers were in charge of the house, using it to detain at least nine Muslim women and girls who were subjected to repeated rapes and sexual assaults, the indictment said. 
 "During the arrests, many civilians were killed, beaten or subjected to sexual assault," the AP quoted his indictment as reading. "Many of the detained women were subjected to humiliating and degrading conditions of life, to brutal beatings and to sexual assault, including rape." 
Stankovic's participation in the alleged atrocities included assigning the women and girls to specific Serb soldiers to be raped and otherwise sexually assaulted and personally raping at least two women, one repeatedly over a three-month period. 
The UN judges decided to grant the prosecutor's motion for referral of his case to the BiH authorities after considering several factors, including the compatibility of BiH's laws with the ICTY statute and the prospects for a fair trial. According to the ICTY statement, the judges were also satisfied that "adequate measures are in place for the protection of witnesses" and "that the death penalty will not be imposed". 
Under Tuesday's ruling, Stankovic is to be transferred to BiH in 30 days. He and the prosecution have 15 days within which to appeal the referral decision. 
According to Reuters, the UN prosecutors are seeking the transfer of several other war crimes cases to BiH. 
