09/12/2010
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 09/12/10 
The Banja Luka-based newspaper Nezavisne novine has selected Croatian President Ivo Josipovic as man of the year, a designation the popular newspaper traditionally awards at year's end. 
Nezavisne novine founder and director Zeljko Kopanja explained that his editorial team decided to recognise Josipovic for his positive contribution to relations among the former Yugoslav republics. 
 That contribution, the editorial team decided, helped lead to reconciliation and tolerance, and lent strong support to the region's European integration. 
 "[Josipovic is] the leader of a new generation of statesmen, without a history of war, someone who impresses with his education, calmness, smoothness, eloquence and willingness to co-operate," Kopanja said. 
The team praised the Croatian president for opening a path towards resolving key issues involving housing and return of refugees from Croatia to Republika Srpska. 
The award created a virtual Balkan mini-summit in Banja Luka. Serbian President Boris Tadic, Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic, BiH Presidency members Nebojsa Radmanovic and Bakir Izetbegovic and other BiH politicians, 15 foreign diplomats and High Representative Valentin Inzko attended the event. 
Josipovic said the award recognises all those who fight for reconciliation, understanding and coexistence, as well as for good relations among different peoples. 
The past has been exceptionally difficult, he said, with innocent people suffering and unthinkable atrocities taking place. That, he said, is why "the crimes must be condemned and the criminals that committed them prosecuted". 
Croatia, BiH, Serbia and Montenegro will one day be together in the EU "as partners, friends and associates", he predicted. 
Banja Luka analyst Milos Solaja told SETimes that Josipovic's message is very important because it concerns four states formed from the former Yugoslavia, each of which was in conflict with the others. 
"The policies of Croatia and Serbia can positively influence the events in Bosnia, because they are turned towards the EU, but BiH, where the situation is quite complicated because of the three ethnic groups, must find itself an internal framework of action," Solaja said. 
University of Mostar Sociology Professor Slavko Kukic also supports the Serbian and Croatian presidents' attempts to change relations established in the last 20 years, but said frequent and unofficial gatherings "may irritate the third, Bosniak side". 
"If they go to Banja Luka and Mostar, then they have to include the state institutions and the Bosniak part of the political elite so it will truly become a form of inter-state co-operation for advancing the common regional good and the good of the BiH, and not be understood by the public as a kind of Serb-Croat provocation," Kukic told SETimes. 
Indeed, some Bosniak voices sounded a markedly skeptical tone about the Banja Luka gathering. 
According to Eldin Karic, chief editor of the Sarajevo web portal Zurnal, it was mainly "a show for the public and not a concrete step for [improving] relations in the region, and specifically improving the situation in BiH," he told SETimes. 
