05/07/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/07/07
In Belgrade, pop and rock concert season kicked off in June with the British duo set, The Chemical Brothers. Serbian audiences have had the chance to groove to bands like the Kreator, the Kaisser Chiefs, the Cult and the Red Hot Chili Peppers so far this summer. While concert expectations run high for the next two months, so do ticket prices. 
The Chemical Brothers shook up the Belgrade's Arena for almost two hours on June 13th. The cheapest ticket was 29 euros, but the British duo still attracted a crowd of 20,000. 
The group brought all of the equipment for their Belgrade gig -- special effects, stage, lights and sound system -- never before used at the Arena. The event also included 20 Serbian DJs. Europe's popular trash metal band, the Kreator, held their first concert in Belgrade on June 16th. The cheapest ticket was around 19 euros. 
The Kaiser Chiefs opened the concert at the Arena on June 19th with "Everyday I Love You Less and Less". During their first time in Belgrade, this British band promoted their new album, "Yours Truly, Angry Mob". The cheapest ticket was 15 euros. 
Those who followed rock music in the early and mid-1990s found the Cult's concert luring. They played at the Tasmajdan Stadium on June 21st before a crowd of 8,000, who paid 25 euros to see the show. 
 The peak of the rock season may have been the Red Hot Chili Peppers concert in Indjija, a town 40km north of Belgrade, in late June. The Peppers played before a crowd of 80,000. Organisers describe it as largest concert of the band's European tour. Tickets were available for sale in several Balkan countries for between 35 and 80 euros. 
The crowd was happy with the technical performance, but disappointed with only 75 minutes of music. The group mostly played numbers from their new album "Stadium Arcadium", while many expected to hear their older tunes. 
July offers two more major rock events. The traditional EXIT festival will run from July 12th to the 15th in Novi Sad, a city north of Belgrade, with a four-day single ticket costing 80 euros. This year the festival will feature the Prodigy, the Beastie Boys, Snoop Dogg and Wu-Tang Clan. 
The highlight of the season for many is the Rolling Stones' concert in Belgrade on July 14th. The Stones have twice before scheduled and cancelled gigs in Belgrade. This time, the cheapest ticket will be around 35 euros. 
There is no shortage of rock concerts this summer in Serbia. However, the most avid fan must pick and choose carefully. With an average salary in Serbia of 300 euros a month, and almost a million unemployed, the choice could be tough. 
