22/09/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje –22/09/05
Announcements of a probable delay in accepting the Adriatic Charter members --Macedonia, Croatia and Albania -- in NATO were received with disappointment in Macedonia. Despite expectations that the three countries would receive invitations for NATO membership at the 2006 summit, this will not happen before 2008, according to the latest signals from Washington. 
"The aspiring countries [are not] ready to join NATO yet, and this is not the time for an enlargement of the Alliance," US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Kurt Volker said on 8 September. "Macedonia, and other countries in the Balkans, might be able to join the Alliance in 2008." 
"We believe defining a later term and giving these countries a chance to improve their performances is a real opportunity for them to become much stronger candidates," Volker said. 
NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer agrees. "I think the United States' case for moving NATO enlargement from 2006 to 2008 is very strong, and I support it," he said. "NATO enlargement is related to meeting certain criteria, as it is also required for the EU membership." 
According to Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski, problems facing the EU reflect on the conditions in NATO. "Macedonian diplomacy will work intensively on the quest for verification of Macedonia's leading position," Buckovski said. "Essential in that process will be to see when invitations to Macedonia, Croatia and Albania are delivered." 
The Macedonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs said that Macedonia would receive an invitation for NATO membership. Whether it is in 2006, 2007 or 2008 does not depend on the country, but on the Alliance. 
 The defence ministry says the signals from Brussels will not discourage the implementation of reforms. "Reforms are being carried out according to the pace defined," said ministry spokeswoman Biljana Avramovska. "The government is effective and successful in this area, which is clear from the reports coming from Brussels." 
