30/04/2013
By Safet Kabashaj and Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Bucharest -- 30/04/13
A recent economic and business collaboration initiative could launch a new relationship between Kosovo and Romania, after respective business representatives signed an agreement aiming to break down barriers set by political differences between two countries. 
Kosovo Business Alliance Chairman Agim Shahini attended the Economic Geography of Romania summit in Bucharest earlier this month, and signed a partnership and co-operation agreement with Mihai Nita, the president of the Industrialists Order of Romania. 
Shahini is pleased with Romanian officials' interest in the Kosovo market, and is confident that the opportunity is realistic. 
"It was [in the] interest of the Romanian people and businesses … [to] establish economic and trade relations with Kosovo," Shahini told SETimes. 
The agreement is expected to produce concrete results, drawing Romanian businesses to Kosovo through the country's favourable policies. 
"If we take a look at the EU market, we understand that the difference in the living standard in Romania is closer to the one in Kosovo than in some EU countries. In that regard, Romanian products could easily be attractive for the Kosovo market, and [vice versa]," Shahini said. 
Romania experts said that Kosovo's 1.8 million-strong market is attractive to investors. 
"Kosovo represents a potential for investments in construction, retail, tourism, industry and agriculture," Bogdan Aaron, a strategic planner and counsellor with the Carpathia Business Centre, which organised the summit, told SETimes. 
Under the initiative, a Romanian Kosovo Business Centre will be opened in Pristina. 
The centre will co-ordinate and support, with specialised personnel, all economic co-operation opportunities between private entrepreneurs and companies from both countries, officials said. 
The Kosovo Business Association will monitor the process and work as an intermediary between business markets. Shahini said the agency has the support of the foreign ministry to establish economic co-operation with Romania, one of five EU countries that does not recognise Kosovo's independence. 
"Kosovo is committed to establishing economic and trade relations with all countries in the region, especially with European Union countries," Artan Behram, a spokesman for the Kosovo Foreign Affairs Ministry, told SETimes. 
What other initiatives can connect Romania and Kosovo? Tell us in the comments below. 
