03/08/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/08/06
Three years of effort by the management of Austria's Mobilkom came to naught at the end of July, as headquarters said "no" to raising the bid for Mobi 63 by another 20m euros. As a result, the Serbian mobile telephone operator, with 2 million clients, went to Norway's Telenor for 1.513 billion euros. 
It was Telenor that offered the initial start price of 1.373 billion euros, well ahead of Mobilkom's 805m euros. A third bidder -- Egypt's Orascom -- gave up when the start price was announced, leaving the other two to battle it out in successive rounds. Although the final offers were nearly equal -- 1.493 billion euros from Mobilkom and 1.513 euros from Telenor, the Norwegian firm won out because of its higher initial offer. 
The amount exceeded predictions, which had ranged from 800m euros to 1.1 billion euros. Most of the funds from the sale -- 1.155 billion euros -- go to the state budget, and the rest to a consortium of Austrian businessmen that bought a percentage of the company from controversial businessman Bogoljub Karic. 
According to the Bloomberg news agency, the government's proceeds from the sale amount to 4.5 per cent of Serbia's GDP. 
"The sale of Mobi 63 is a huge success for Serbia," Bloomberg quoted Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic as saying. He pledged that the funds would go towards the National Investment Plan, an array of initiatives meant to overhaul Serbia's roads, railways and other infrastructure. 
Telenor, which owns Montenegro's ProMonte, is now poised to expand its market share in the region. 
Losers in the sale include Karic, who founded the company once known as Mobtel, and Telekom Austria, which hoped to add the firm to a group that already includes VIPnetu Croatia and Si.mobilu Slovenia. 
Mobi 63 employees are also unhappy. Unlike other tender procedures, this one did not come with a social programme attached. Aleksander Titovic, from the telecommunications workers "Nezavisnost", has accused Dinkic of deliberately postponing negotiations with the workers while attempting to speed up the sale. 
