13/04/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 13/04/12
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) spent 1 billion euros on public sector salaries during the first three months of this year, while the state still has not adopted a budget. 
Economic experts say that while authorities are allocating big money from the budget for administration, citizens are fed up with the protracted process. 
Samir Piljic, 34, from Sarajevo, has worked in the Health Insurance Fund of the Federation of BiH for three years. 
"My net salary is about 750 euros [monthly]. Working hours are 9-5, although the effective working is about 3 hours a day," he told SETimes. 
Salaries in BiH's administrations are 50% higher than average wages, and almost three times higher than the average pension. The average salary of workers employed in the administration of BiH is around 700 euros, while the average pension is about 150 euros a month. 
Goran Radivojac, economics professor at the University of Banja Luka, said that the funds allocated for public administration are huge, but could be justified if the administration was doing a good job. 
"For some agencies, people do not even know they exist. These people are receiving good salaries, and their results are questionable. However, each state has an administration and it is important that it is effective. If you are waiting on documents for several months, then it is a big problem," Radivojac told SETimes. 
Although the country has been facing a dire economic crisis for the past three months, the number of people working in the administration has grown. Now numbering around 73,000, it has grown by 4,000 people since 2008. 
The Herzegovina-Neretva Canton, headquartered is in the city of Mostar, will use 70% of its budget for administration paychecks. Canton Prime Minister Denis Lasic said that this year's budget will need to be reformed. 
"We'll consider all suggestions so we could save some money and so we can get a quality budget for this year," Lasic told SETimes. The canton's budget is around 90m euros this year. 
A report by the World Bank, released in March, said that BiH needs a complete reform of public expenditure, which will include reducing the public sector. According to the report, 13% of BiH's GDP is going to pay administration wages. That is unsustainable, the Bank said. 
Filip Banjac, 24, from Banja Luka says that citizens have been dissatisfied with services in the public sector for years. 
"The lines at the counters, rude clerks, expensive fees, corrupt officials. That is the reality of today's situation in the administration. If anyone thinks that this will change, we will need to fundamentally change the whole structure and functioning of public services, because nothing would be achieved if the fix is only cosmetic," Banjac told SETimes. 
The situation is similar in many of the Southeast European countries. 
In Romania, the state administration employed 170,000 people in 2009, and is increasing. The country will earmark 3.7 billion euros to pay for the administration. The total state budget is around 22 billion euros. 
"I sometimes have the feeling [the public sector] works against the citizen. It is a pity that more than two decades after the fall of communism, we are still witnessing such old and counterproductive practices in a society which tends to become modernised," Bucharest insurance broker Daniel Parfene, 37, told SETimes. 
In Bulgaria, around 115,000 people work in the administration, the military and the social security system, costing the state 1.5 billion euros annually. 
"What those figures suggest is that ten private sector workers are needed to secure the salary of one state administration official. Given the rising unemployment, that ratio is set to grow. [But] at the same time, the state apparatus is not producing policies promoting employment growth," Sofia resident Boyka Vitanova told SETimes. 
