28/02/2006
(EUobserver, AP, The Guardian, International Herald Tribune, Radio B92, BETA, RFE/RL, FT - 27/02/06; AP, AFP - 26/02/06; AP, AFP - 16/02/06)
Montenegro's ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) agreed on Monday (27 February) to follow the formula proposed by the EU for the republic's independence referendum, expected to be held in mid-May. 
"The Democratic Party of Socialists has decided to accept the unusual ... recommendation from the EU," the pro-independence party of Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic said in a statement. 
Presenting Brussels's proposal for the planned plebiscite, Miroslav Lajcak, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana's special envoy for the Montenegrin referendum, said earlier this month that the Union would consider a "yes" vote on independence valid if it is backed by 55 per cent of those who go to the polls. 
Montenegrin opposition parties, which want the republic to remain part of the loose union with Serbia established three years ago, said on Saturday they accepted the Union's proposal for the referendum. 
The DPS announced its reluctant acceptance of the EU-set threshold after failing to convince Brussels of its own stance. The party had argued that a "yes" vote should be considered legitimate if it is supported by 41 per cent of all registered voters. 
"We don't have clearly defined EU rules on this issue, while both parties in Montenegro did find enough practical examples from different European countries to support their case -- but this is not the right way to solve this problem," Lajcak told EUobserver on Monday. "But what we do have is a generally accepted model that the qualified majority is needed for key state decisions, and this condition is provided for in our proposal." 
In an interview aired on Sunday on private BK Television in Belgrade, Djukanovic for the first time signaled that his party would eventually accept the EU-proposed threshold. 
"We shall persist in carrying out the independence referendum according to European standards," the Montenegrin prime minister said. 
"We want a European future for Montenegro," he added, voicing confidence that the independence bid would garner the required 55 per cent majority. 
The EU has recommended that the vote be held on 14 May with a single question on the ballot paper: "Are you for a Montenegro as an independent state with full international and legal subjectivity?" 
The Montenegrin Parliament is expected to give its formal response to the EU proposal on Wednesday, when it is due to adopt a law on the referendum and set the date of the vote. 
