18/05/2010
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 18/05/10
In what is being heralded as a major "thaw" in relations, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan detailed Turkey's position on a series of thorny issues during a two-day visit to Athens that ended on Saturday (May 15th). 
Erdogan -- who led a delegation of more than 300 officials and business leaders -- held discussions with Greek counterpart George Papandreou on topics that included military overflights by Turkish warplanes in the Aegean, the still standing threat of war by the Turkish national assembly and the Cyprus situation. Greece has long considered these as major obstacles to fully normalising ties. 
"Those who write history will write that two ancient civilisations, two important actors are now embarking on a path towards peace and friendship," Erdogan said after the meetings. 
 Regarding the overflights, Erdogan said that as part of a "goodwill gesture", Turkish and Greek warplanes should fly unarmed in the region. He also said they should allow for the possibility that both sides could submit flight plans ahead of scheduled manoeuvres. 
 "Good-neighbourliness means that when I want to enter your airspace I will first knock on the door, and say 'I am entering your airspace'. This is what we call flight plans. If the Turkish air force submitted flight plans … there would be no interception by Greek planes, armed or unarmed," Papandreou replied. 
 Asked about the long-standing Cyprus problem, Erdogan said his government wants reciprocity on the issue of allowing Cypriot-flagged vessels and Cypriot carriers in Turkish ports and airports, respectively, while reiterating his backing for the Annan peace plan to reunite the island. 
"The Greek Cypriot community did not vote in favour of the solution tabled by the UN, therefore, we must go back to the table [to negotiate]. That's what is happening now," Papandreou said. 
Despite the positive tone of the talks, many analysts remained sceptical. 
 "It was ascertained that after decades of contacts and repeated negotiations at all levels absolutely nothing has changed," columnist Yiannis Kartalis wrote in the Athens daily Vima on Monday. "The question is, therefore, if anything will change now, because good intentions were expressed, on the one hand, but no mechanism was agreed to for solving problems, one based on a common perception over the rules of International Law." "
Because that is the primary reason for the continued impasse, namely, the different interpretations of these rules by both sides," Kartalis wrote. 
 "As much as we would desire to promote the positive dimension of the visit, namely, the fact that Greece and Turkey are re-activating themselves in the sector of 'low policy' [issues], and despite the good climate, unfortunately, the problems in the Aegean remain," Thanos Dokos, general director of the Athens think tank ELIAMEP was quoted as saying. 
Summing up his party's position over the Erdogan visit, main opposition New Democracy leader Antonis Samaras noted on Monday that "when a country is in a weaker position it does not enter negotiations over its national interests. Issues that we did not solve while we were in a more powerful position and Turkey was in a weaker position cannot, obviously, be solved today, when we are experiencing a severe economic crisis." 
