30/12/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 30/12/04
A total of 3,716 products will become less expensive in Macedonia as a result of decreased customs duties that take effect on 1 January. The reduction is needed to comply with Macedonia's obligations under its agreement with the WTO. In addition, prices will fall on all products imported from EU countries, as stipulated in the Stabilisation and Association Agreement. In all, around one third of imported products will become cheaper. 
Food, agricultural products, liquor and other beverages -- such as soft drinks, natural juices and mineral water -- will see the largest price drops. Cars and home appliances will also become less expensive, along with cosmetics and personal hygiene products. Smaller reductions will apply to raw materials in the chemical industry. 
"Customs duties for all alcoholic drinks except wine and beer will decrease by 12 per cent as of 1 January," Customs Administration director Ljubomir Mihajlovski says. "For chocolate, the rate will be lower -- 7 per cent to 10 per cent -- as will be the decrease of customs duties on furniture." 
Textile duties, meanwhile, will decrease from 31 per cent to 29 per cent. 
"A decrease of customs duties will mean a decrease of the revenues of the Customs Administration, which will roughly amount to 24m euros," Mihajlovski says, noting that further decreases could follow, as a result of free trade agreements signed with other countries. 
Importers have said they will change retail prices to reflect the new customs rates. According to industry representatives, the lower prices should increase consumption and result in higher turnover. 
"We will decrease prices of all products for which the customs duties are decreased," says Martin Markovski, director of Rudine, a food import/export company. "It is much better to have lower prices because this means higher consumption." According to Markovski, the decrease in customs duties will have a beneficial effect on domestic production, because local producers will work to become more competitive. 
