24/06/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 24/06/13
Montenegro's parliament opened an inquiry into the case of leaked tape recordings of the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS), which analysts said is a turning point in the democratisation of the country's political system and electoral process. 
Montenegrin media published the tapes' transcripts, which revealed leading DPS officials instructing other party members to use public resources and money to obtain more votes in last month's election. 
The transcripts prompted authorities to act. 
Koca Pavlovic, head of the ad hoc parliamentary committee investigating the recordings, said the investigation must put an end to the misuse of public funds and institutions for campaign purposes. 
"We will hear from 15 high state officials, including Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic. I am sure this committee and parliament in their conclusions will require some action from the state prosecutor. That would be the minimum result expected from this parliamentary investigation, that can also help restore basic confidence in the electoral process," Pavlovic told SETimes. 
Chief prosecutor Veselin Vuckovic said the investigation will be conducted swiftly. 
"A large number of prosecutors have been engaged. Solely in the town of Pljevlja over 100 persons were examined in only five days. We will try to reach specific results as soon as possible," Vuckovic said. 
The state prosecutor's interest is a positive sign because the whole affair is of a criminal nature, said Milan Popovic, a professor at the Political Science Faculty in Podgorica. 
"[But] the investigation is a result of pressure from Brussels," Popovic told SETimes. 
Popovic said EU officials have repeatedly stated they expect specific results. 
"This is certainly a significant step forward and toward democratisation of the entire political system. The results of the investigation are crucial for opening chapters 23 and 24 of the negotiations for accession with the EU," Pavlovic said. 
The two chapters, considered by analysts as the most demanding, are aimed to address corruption and organised crime; Montenegro published draft action plans which serve as benchmarks for meeting the criteria of these chapters. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fule has said Montenegro needs to rebuild confidence in the separation of party and state, but legal and political action is needed to re-establish trust in state institutions. 
"This should establish a clear, widely accepted distinction between public and party interests," Fule said. 
But Djukanovic, re-elected last year as prime minister for the seventh time, said Montenegro should address the problems it faces that are much greater than the leaked tapes affair. 
Djukanovic characterised the recorded statements as ordinary political opinions, which is why those who uttered them should not be prosecuted. 
"The publishing of those recordings from our sessions was a political trick that aimed to harm our candidate in the presidential election," Djukanovic told the state Radio Montenegro. 
Many citizens said they are tired of constant political scandals but have not lost hope that the politicians' actions will be addressed. 
"Someone will open all the hidden files and listen to all the secret tapes. Whether this will happen now or in 10 years we are yet to see. One thing I am certain of is when that happens, many on the top will regret their past," Gojko Golub, 51, a resident of Podgorica, told SETimes. 
What can politicians do toincrease citizen's trust in state institutions? Share your opinion in the comments space. 
