25/07/2011
 By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times Tirana – 25/07/
In an exclusive interview with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku, Foreign Minister Edmond Haxhinasto discusses ties with Kosovo, Serbia, Greece, Macedonia and Montenegro. 
 SETimes: Time after time, there have been complaints and media reports alleging a kind of paternal behavior by Albania towards Kosovo. How would you characterize the relationship? 
 Edmond Haxhinasto: I think these are opinions that were expressed in the past. By now, there is a clear partnership between Albania and Kosovo. 
This is due to a number of reasons -- firstly because Kosovo is a state which, in the short time since its independence, has shown great maturity in building democratic institutions, in its behavior internationally, and also as a very important factor of co-operation for peace and security in our region. 
The relationship between Kosovo and Albania already has clear objectives: first, to co-operate in increasing the number of recognitions; secondly, to facilitate Kosovo's engagement as soon as possible in regional initiatives and Euro-Atlantic co-operation; and thirdly, to realize full economic integration with Albania and other countries in the region. Such a relationship cannot be paternalistic, but requires a daily partnership. 
 SETimes: One of the recent developments was lifting visas between Albania and Serbia. Does that mean that Albania and Serbia are entering a new phase in their relations? 
 Haxhinasto: Both countries, Albania and Serbia, have a visa-free regime with regard to the EU, to the Schengen Zone. Regional initiatives such as the Migration, Asylum, Refugees Regional Initiative (MARRI) have made tremendous progress in regional movement with just ID cards. So the agreement with Serbia is a positive development in the right direction. 
 SETimes: What are the main areas of co-operation between Albania and Serbia at the moment? 
 Haxhinasto: We co-operate within the regional initiatives framework; it is a multilateral co-operation, but our bilateral agendas also have enough elements. A number of agreements are being prepared, we co-operate in the economic context, and Serbia is a partner in growth. There is untapped potential in economic relations between the two countries. 
 SETimes: Serbia has been boycotting several regional and international initiatives due to Kosovo's participation. Do you think this boycott is productive? 
 Haxhinasto: I think it is an attitude and a choice that does not help Serbia at all. I would define it as a choice that is not in compliance with the European spirit that characterises the region. Basically, this spirit is all-inclusive and the adoption of the co-operation concept is a matter of peoples, of the societies, and not an issue of the status of territories. 
Regional initiatives are designed to bring people closer -- politicians, societies, cultures. Respecting this fundamental principle is the basic reason of initiatives, but also of united Europe. There is room for Serbia to change its position, to reflect and acknowledge a reality that is irreversible. 
 SETimes: Concerning elections in Macedonia, Nikola Gruevski is again the prime minister with a considerable majority. How are ties with Macedonia? 
 Haxhinasto: Relations with Macedonia are very good. Recent developments make us optimistic that Macedonia is on the right track. I hope the new government's composition will reflect the integration of Albanians in the governance and the institutions. The economic co-operation between the two countries is on the right track; the level of exchanges is growing. 
The challenge between us remains building common infrastructure, especially the railway. With Macedonia, we are in the process of regional co-operation, but also Euro-Atlantic integration. 
 SETimes: What's the impact of the Greek crisis in Albania? 
 Haxhinasto: The Albanian economy has, thankfully, been relatively immune to the economic situation in Greece and the deep problems it's going through. The reasons are many: the independence of our banking system, as well as economic policies that are based on, and have created a possibility for, independent development of the country and increased exports. 
We have no exact figures on how many emigrants have returned. What happens, in my knowledge, is that emigrants share time and labour between Greece and Albania. But I also think that the Greek economy, which is going through unseen hardships, has the potential -- with the support package from the EU, IMF and other financial institutions -- to recover and become stable again. Part of this process will be those Albanians who work in the sectors vital to the functioning of the Greek economy. 
 SETimes: What can you say about Albania's relations with Montenegro? 
 Haxhinasto: This is a good relationship. I think the main challenges between the two countries are building a common infrastructure. Montenegro should invest seriously in road links between the two countries, in Podgorica and the Shkoder-axis, and in the Shkodra-Ulqin axis. 
The investment should also cover the Hani Hoti and Muriqan border crossings because Albanian roads have reached a high standard, while Montenegro still has much to do. Building this road infrastructure is necessary for the exchange of economic development, especially for the tourism industry on both sides of the border. 
 SETimes: What is the size of Albania's minorities compared to the overall Albanian population? Do you have exact figures? 
 Haxhinasto: We have precise data on their numbers from different censuses. Albania is not concerned with the number of minorities, but rather with minority rights, respect for their rights in full compliance with international conventions to which Albania adheres, and full compliance with the state's legislation. 
 SETimes: There an ongoing debate in Albania regarding the future population census, which would include questions on ethnicity and religion. What is your view? 
 Haxhinasto: As a foreign minister, I fully support conducting such a census based on the legislation that has already been approved by the parliament. I also think the sensibilities expressed in the media by certain interest groups, associations or political parties are not so much about the census and the representation of ethnicity and religion, but reflect a kind of fear, I would say, of manipulation that could come from the process. 
I think all the tools, all the mechanisms are there [to ensure] that this process is accomplished without being manipulated, in order for what will be done – the conducting of the census – to be an important tool for public policy later, to better serve the country's communities, be they religious or ethnic. 
 SETimes: There is a constant call from the international community for an end to Albania's political stalemate. Is there hope of finding a solution? 
 Haxhinasto: I think that resolving the political situation is not a matter of political agreement between the opposition and the majority. The resolution of this situation comes from understanding the responsibilities of each party to put the country's interests -- the interests of the citizens -- above all, and to understand that Albanian citizens are more interested in moving one step further towards integration in Europe than in the political, individual agendas of the political leaders. 
In implementing this major political obligation, I hope the opposition will get engaged in an institutional process for meeting the obligations that the country has to meet in order to obtain candidate status. The majority has already shown its continuing readiness to engage in a process of dialogue, thankfully, the opposition has done it as well in drafting the action plan for implementing the 12 priorities. I hope the spirit that existed in the joint parliamentary sessions on drafting the action plan continues in aspects of its implementation as well. 
