05/03/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/03/08
UNMIK authorities re-asserted control Tuesday (February4th) over a rail line between Zvecan and Leshak in the northern part of Kosovo. The move came one day after Serbian Railways chairman Branislav Ristivojevic – a close adviser to Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica -- announced that his company had taken over the 60km stretch of track. 
At around 9:35 am on Tuesday, border police told a representative of Serbian Railways that it would not be permitted to send a train south of Leshak, UNMIK head Joachim Ruecker told reporters. Serbian Railways complied, he said. 
 "The successful intervention by the UNMIK Border Police today reverses the challenge to UNMIK's authority that occurred yesterday when Serbian Railways illegally sent two of its trains south of Leshak," Ruecker said, adding that such actions by the company breached a 2003 Memorandum of Understanding signed by its predecessor, Yugoslav Railways. 
"UNMIK and its partners will continue to meet any challenges to law and order throughout Kosovo," he added. 
Ruecker, Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and the commander of KFOR, Xavier de Marnhac, spoke to reporters Tuesday after meeting at the UN building in Pristina to discuss the railway incident and the Kosovo situation in general. 
"KFOR is here to maintain a secure situation in all parts of Kosovo. And everyone knows that KFOR, UMMIK and the Kosovo Police Service have a good co-operation," de Marnhac said. 
Thaci, meanwhile, insisted that his government has a mandate covering all of Kosovo and that "everyone will be under the law." 
"We have signals that all citizens are ready to accept the new reality in Kosovo and to integrate in this society," he said. 
In recent days, the prime minister has visited northern Mitrovica and other Serb-populated parts of Kosovo, seeking to reach out to people there. He acknowledged that the situation in these areas was not the same as in other parts of Kosovo. Nevertheless, he said, "there is no panic or atmosphere of concern. They believe in Kosovo's institutions." 
