02/09/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 02/09/11
The EULEX special prosecutor's office in Kosovo has pressed charges against four daily Infopress employees and owner Rexhep Hoti, as well as against Skenderaj Mayor Sami Lushtaku. 
The six are accused of slander and threats against Jeta Xharra -- anchor and producer of the television show "Life in Kosovo" -- and her team. 
Xharra is also director of the Balkans Investigative Network (BIRN) office for Kosovo. 
The case stems from an edition of the show broadcast in 2009, in which BIRN Kosovo editor Krenar Gashi and journalist Jeta Abazi discussed a provision in Kosovo law under which candidates for election must disclose any past criminal background. 
The show, aired on the state network RTK, then reported that Lushtaku had served a four-month jail sentence for threatening a judge and preventing him from carrying out his duty. 
TV footage showed the "Life in Kosovo" reporter and cameraman being forced to leave the Skenderaj municipality. Their camera was opened and the tape stolen by an unknown perpetrator. 
Not long after, Infopress began publishing articles that were highly critical of Xharra. 
One story allegedly claimed she "brought it on herself not to have a long life". An interview with Lushtaku that Infopress published accused Xharra of being a Serbian spy. 
Lushtaku is a member of Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) and Infopress was at the time reportedly close to the PDK-led government. 
Journalist associations in Kosovo and abroad -- including the Committee for the Protection of Journalists, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International -- have urged a thorough investigation. 
"Threats against journalists of whatever kind are unacceptable for us and for every democratic society," Kosovo's Independent Media Commission head Naile Selimaj Krasniqi told SETimes. "We have called on all competent institutions to take the incident as seriously as other incidents of this kind." 
"Freedom of expression is secured and strengthened especially through the functioning of the relevant mechanisms, such as the courts. We are interested and we hope to see a right judicial process on the case," Krasniqi added. 
The Association of Professional Journalists of Kosovo (AGPK) welcomed the indictment but repeatedly expressed concern about the two-year delay and hesitation by law enforcement. 
"We urge EULEX to conduct a fair and transparent trial in this case," in order to bring the truth to light, AGPK's Valdete Osmani told SETimes. 
