10/05/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 10/05/07
Serbian police on Wednesday (May 9th) said they have detained eight people in connection with an attack last month on a journalist's home. The suspects are former members of the Scorpions paramilitary unit -- the same group involved in a videotaped execution of six Muslims from Srebrenica in 1995. 
Two hand grenades were placed outside Vreme reporter Dejan Anastasijevic's bedroom window in the early hours of April 14th. One went off, the other failed to explode. Although no one was injured, the blast caused extensive damage. 
Writing in Time magazine, Anastasijevic suggested that the attack was connected to a recent TV appearance in which he discussed the Srebrenica massacre and the verdict handed down by a Belgrade court against four Scorpions members seen in the execution video. 
The men were sentenced to a total of 58 years in prison. 
"Like many decent people in Serbia, I was disappointed and somewhat angered by the outcome of the trial, and I expressed those views on television," Anastasijevic wrote. "I guess that provoked someone in the other camp." 
Srebrenica is "a topic many of my fellow Serbs would prefer to forget", he wrote. 
After the attack, Anastasijevic received outpourings of support from his colleagues and the public. The Independent Association of Journalists of Serbia has been broadcasting daily appeals for the perpetrator to be found and brought to justice. 
"This story mustn't disappear," says the association's deputy chairperson, Djordje Vlajic. "It must not become another unsolved mystery. A line should be drawn somewhere and it should be said: Enough is enough!" 
Journalists in Serbia have been targeted on several occasions, especially during the rule of Slobodan Milosevic. The newest incident has raised fears that Serbia is drifting back towards violence and "virulent nationalism", in part because of frustrations over Kosovo and the failure of democratic parties to form a new government. 
"There have been 111 politically motivated assaults in the past three months alone, and hate speech is becoming increasingly common in the media and politics. The targets are human rights activists, journalists and politicians who dare to stand up against the nationalists," according to Anastasijevic. 
Criminologist Dobrivoje Radovanovic says the state often turns a blind eye towards ultranationalist organisations, even those with links to crime and a history of violence. 
"Such organisations exist in Serbia. They have enough means and followers ready to attack a journalist, if they disagree with his or her opinion," Radovanovic says. 
"An atmosphere has been created, an atmosphere in which maniacs, thieves and scoundrels are encouraged to kill,"said Milos Vasic, a colleague of Anastasijevic's at Vreme. 
