10/05/2005
(Reuters - 10/05/05; Bloomberg, Ireland Online, Cyprus News Agency, Turks.us - 09/05/05)
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said Monday (9 May) that UN Secretary General Kofi Annan could initiate a new round of Cyprus reunification talks soon. He was confident that the Greek Cypriots would also support a new UN-led effort. 
"Annan said a new peace process can be launched and I saw that the Greek Cypriot side wouldn't oppose this," Erdogan said at a televised news conference in Ankara on his return from Moscow, where he discussed the issue with the UN chief and Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos. The three officials met on the sidelines of ceremonies marking the 60th anniversary of the end of World War II. 
"I saw the Greek Cypriots were not negative about this," Erdogan told reporters. "Compared to their previous statements, I saw they approached positively the issue of carrying out such a process." 
 The latest international effort to reunite Cyprus collapsed in April of last year, when the Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected the UN proposal for a peace deal. Turkey and the majority of the Turkish Cypriots backed the plan. Eventually, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot south of the island joined the EU on 1 May 2004. 
 Erdogan told reporters on Monday that he and Annan would discuss Cyprus in greater detail during his visit to the United States in early June. 
Annan recently asked both sides to set forth in writing their proposals and objections to the UN plan, which is expected to again serve as the basis of any future talks. The Greek Cypriots, who opposed a number of provisions in the proposed deal, have reportedly not responded yet. The Turkish Cypriots have expressed their determination to seek a deal. 
Following the talks in Moscow, Reuters quoted a UN spokesman in Nicosia as saying on Tuesday that the Greek Cypriots had signalled their readiness for "exploratory talks" to precede any negotiations. 
"Papadopoulos confirmed he would be sending an envoy to the UN soon for exploratory talks," the spokesman told Reuters. "In light of the visit, the secretary general will decide on what further steps to take," he added. 
A solution to the Cyprus issue would improve significantly Turkey's chances for EU membership, easing fears that Greek Cypriots could use their power of veto against Ankara. Turkey is scheduled to begin accession talks with the EU on 3 October. 
