08/03/2010
(Zaman, Hurriyet, AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, New York Times, VOA, DPA, Deutsche Welle - 08/03/10)
At least 57 people were killed and scores of others were injured in a pre-dawn earthquake in eastern Turkey on Monday (March 8th). 
The quake -- measuring 6.0 on the Richter scale -- hit a rural mountainous area in the Elazig province at 4:32 a.m. local time (0232 GMT), while many were still asleep. It was followed by at least 40 aftershocks, including a 5.5-magnitude one, over the next six hours. 
 More aftershocks are expected in the area -- home to about 500,000 people -- in the coming days. 
The epicentre of the earthquake was in the village of Basyurt, near the town of Karakocan, about 550km east of Ankara, the Istanbul-based Kandilli Observatory said. Victims included residents of five other villages where scores of mud-brick houses were damaged or destroyed. The minarets of three mosques were toppled. 
Media and government reports put the number of injured between 70 and 100. Many were taken in private cars or ambulances to a state hospital in the nearby town of Kovancilar. Some of the injured were reportedly hurt while jumping from windows or balconies when the first tremors struck. 
The quake was felt in the neighbouring provinces of Tunceli, Bingol and Diyarbakir, the Turkish daily Hurriyet reported. 
"Villages consisting mainly of mud-brick houses have been damaged, but we have minimal damage such as cracks in buildings made of cement or stone," Elazig Governor Muammer Erol told CNN Turk television. 
At least 17 of those killed in the earthquake were from Okcular, the largest of the six villages and the hardest hit, with up to 30 of its houses knocked down, according to the BBC. 
"The village is totally flattened," Hasan Demirdag, the village's administrator, was quoted as telling Turkish television station NTV. 
More than 200 rescue workers and medical personnel rushed to the area, according to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, in a report by the Bloomberg news agency. Government officials, including Deputy Prime Minister Cemil Cicek and three other ministers, headed to the disaster zone, while the Turkish Red Crescent has reportedly sent 230 tents for those left homeless. 
Television footage showed rescuers digging out people from under the rubble of collapsed buildings in Okcular. 
"Ambulances keep on going back and forth," Erol told reporters. "Rescue work is continuing. Our gendarmerie and civil defence teams are at work." 
 With a population of 547,000, Elazig is near a network of dams, hydroelectric power stations and irrigation channels in the Southeastern Anatolia Project area. 
Turkey, which sits on several major fault lines, is particularly prone to earthquakes. One of the most devastating occurred in August 1999, when a 7.6-magnitude tremor rocked heavily populated areas in the northwest, killing more than 17,000 people. In early May 2003, an earthquake measuring 6.4 in the city of Bingol left nearly 180 people dead, including 83 children dead. 
