10/01/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/01/12
Experts say Kosovo could potentially reduce both the jobless rate and dependency on imports through the development of the agriculture sector. 
Right now, farmland accounts for 53% of Kosovo's total land area, and forests 41%. According to data from the Food and Agriculture Organisation, 741,316 acres of land are being cultivated and 444,789 acres are upland pasture. The majority -- 80% -- of agricultural land is privately owned, providing subsistence farming for individual households. 
The agricultural sector contributes around 13% of Kosovo's overall GDP, and accounts for 16% of total export value. It's an integral generator of national wealth, although Kosovo still imports many agricultural products. 
Kosovo Ministry for Agriculture and Forestry spokeperson Adil Behramaj told SETimes that the government takes the needs and possibilities of the agriculture sector seriously, and has been offering subsidies for years. 
"Since 2008, in full compliance with the requirements of the European Commission, with full purpose of co-ordination of EU policies," said Behramaj adding that to date, more than 27,000 farmers have "benefited directly". 
Yet, he concedes that development of the sector is still in the early stages. 
"Unable to start earlier, we've started now, [and] we are optimistic. Agriculture is on track for development," says Behramaj. 
But Dardan Sejdiu, an economy expert with the Vetvendosje Party, disagrees. He tells SETimes the government is not taking the sector seriously. 
"Agriculture in Kosovo is only a priority for the rhetoric of the government, as now 12 years after the war, only 1.7% of the budget is allocated for the agriculture sector. Consequently it is not nearly enough for a country [in which] nearly 40% of the population is connected with agriculture," says Sejdiu. 
He says that not a single strategy has been developed since the end of the conflict to develop the sector. 
"The government should raise the [allocation] of agriculture in the budget. Second, fiscal policy must function with local production and as such, encourage private businesses to enter into production, and encourage farmers to develop their fields. Thirdly, government should create a fund that subsidises the banking interest rates for businesses that enter into agriculture production … and [implement] full trade reciprocity measures," says Sejdiu. 
Economist Liridona Konushefci told SETimes that the focus should be on the greatest possibilities the sector offers. 
"Kosovo can be a good producer of milk and meat products, fruits and vegetables [and more]. And ... the government can find a better way to help farmers, but also control the import level -- which in some cases is unreasonable -- as we have many products here and buy the same from other countries." 
"All recent governments have considered the ministry of agriculture as a third-hand ministry … Current minister [Blerand Stavileci] has changed that and improved the situation." 
Sejdiu says the sector's focus needs readjustment. 
"The first to be done is to clearly define the important sectors, and grapes may be one of them. Also, policies should be constituted that assist producers of grapes in placing their product in the local market and also international markets. Here, our embassies can help by performing the work of economic diplomacy. And, finally, the problem must be preceded by development policies, not the policy of firefighting," says Sejdiu. 
