02/04/2012
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 02/04/12
Unless a sponsor can be found, Greece will lose one of its most coveted symbols of glory -- a silver cup awarded to Spyridon Louis for winning the marathon at the first modern Olympic Games in Athens in 1896. 
The six-inch cup, now owned by grandson Spyros Louis, is being auctioned at Christie's in London on April 18th, four months ahead of the Olympics there. 
Louis said he wants to give the proceeds, expected to be between $190,000-$250,000, to his children. "Our family has been very proud to have the honour of looking after this important historical sporting trophy for the last 116 years," Louis said. 
"My grandfather's achievement of winning the first ever marathon at the first modern Olympic Games will remain part of my family's heritage forever. However, it is time to look to the future, not the past. I have two children and the most important thing for me is to ensure that they are looked after as well as possible. It is always going to be impossible to split a cup." 
Greece's current Olympic Stadium, used for the 2004 Games, is named after Spyridon. 
Several initiatives have been launched to keep the cup in Greece. 
Outitzi Kyriaki, director of the Thessaloniki Olympic Museum in northern Greece, told SETimes she hopes someone will step forward to keep the cup in the country. 
"We have financial problems in Greece. We are trying to reach rich people," to buy it, she added. "For us, it's important, but maybe not for someone else," she said, adding that the cup is one of three given to the family. She said the family retains the others. 
Giorgios Patoulis, the mayor of the Athens' neighbourhood of Maroussi, where Spyridos Louis was born, said the municipality is collecting donations. Patoulis said the culture ministry should have declared the trophy a national treasure and prevented its sale. 
"We are in contact with Christie's so we can agree on a sum and prevent the cup going to auction," he said. 
Spyridos Louis's dramatic victory came after he took the lead when Australian runner Edwin Flack, the winner of the 800m and 1500m events, collapsed. It set the stage for the marathon to be a prestige event in future Olympics, and for the creation of marathons in New York and Boston. 
With Greece undergoing a crushing economic crisis, attention has been turned more towards survival for many. Greece is relying on sponsors -- including German carmaker BMW -- to send a full team to the 2012 London Games, and to fund its leg of the Olympic torch relay. 
"Despite the fact that we have huge financial difficulties as a country ... we won't scale down on what we are going to do on Greek soil for the torch relay," Spyros Capralos, Hellenic Olympic Committee head, told SETimes. 
"It's going all around the country ... to remind all our fellow countrymen of the importance of the torch, the importance of the Olympic Games, that everything started from here." 
Irene Spanou, a spokesperson for the Marathon Museum, told SETimes that, "We're trying to keep the cup for the museum. We're working with the Greek Olympic association to find the money for this. We're trying to find a bank or a rich man, but these days there are many problems here." 
Voula Patoulidou, a gold medal winner in the 100m hurdles for Greece at the 1992 Olympics in Barcelona, and a board member of the Marathon Museum, said she's also trying to organise a fund-raising effort. 
"As one of the most historic symbols of the Olympics, directly linked to Greek sporting and cultural history, it is the duty of all of us to ensure that it remains in our country and [can] be inherited by future generations of Greeks, preserving the historic memory of one of the greatest moments in modern Greek history," she said in an appeal on the museum's website. 
"This historical object belongs to Greece and the committee will take all necessary steps to preserve this piece of our national heritage," added Patoulidou. 
In the United States, the National Hellenic Society is organising a marathon exhibit to be taken around the country, with the aid of the National Hellenic Museum of Chicago. 
The curator, Bethany Fleming, told SETimes she hopes the cup can be saved for Greece and that her museum would like to feature it as part of the national tour. "It's surprising to me that most people don't care," she told SETimes. 
"Louis' winning that marathon was galvanising to the Greeks." 
