06/10/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 06/10/09
The EULEX Court on Friday (October 2nd) sentenced three members of the so-called Llapi Group -- Latif Gashi, Nazif Mehmeti and Rrustem Mustafa-Remi -- to prison terms ranging from three to six years for war crimes committed in the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo. 
The three were found guilty of inhumane treatment of civilian detainees, beating and torture, said EULEX. 
This latest trial against the three opened on July 7th in Pristina District Court, with a EULEX prosecutor. 
This was only the latest chapter, however. The original investigation into the case lasted from 2001 to 2002. It first went to trial in 2003 and all three were convicted and sentenced. But in 2005, the Supreme Court of Kosovo ordered a new trial. 
Now that it too has ended with convictions, the government is angry. "The war of the Kosovo Liberation Army was a liberation war, just and supported by all Kosovo citizens," the administration said in a press release after Friday's verdict. 
On Saturday, EULEX responded. 
"EULEX would like to underline that the verdict issued yesterday in the District Court of Pristina, by a mixed panel -- a Kosovo judge and two EULEX judges -- is based on an independent judiciary and each individual's equal treatment before the law. EULEX supports and shares the Kosovo government's engagement and dedication to the rule of law and unbiased justice. This commitment is crucial in ensuring that Kosovo's judiciary meets the European standards." 
Mustafa-Remi, a lawmaker from the Democratic Party of Kosovo and chairman of parliament's Commission on Security and Internal Affairs, held a press conference immediately after the sentencing, declaring his innocence. 
"A wrong was done today within the justice system. It is an external intervention, one we did not expect. We do not feel guilty, not I, not Latif Gashi, who is on his way to serve his sentence today, not Nazif Mehmeti," Mustafa-Remi told local media. 
He said he trusts that the Supreme Court will overturn the decision. 
The Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) also condemned the verdict, describing it as another stain on the handicapped and disfunctional Kosovo justice system. 
"AAK is engaged in establishing a real justice system in the Republic of Kosovo and, at the same time, remains firm in the overall protection of our joint values, and the protection of the values of Kosovo Liberation Army," said Ramush Haradinaj of the AAK. 
