23/09/2010
(eKathimerini, Balkans.com - 23/09/10; AFP, Reuters, FT, Wall Street Journal, DPA, BBC, ITN News, Euronews, The Sofia Echo, EMportal, ANA-MPA, eKathimerini - 22/09/10) 
Parliament adopted a controversial law Wednesday (September 22nd) that opens up the country's freight sector to competition, despite fierce opposition by truck owners. 
The legislation provides for a significant though gradual reduction in the price of new trucking licenses over the next three years -- from 70,000 euros initially down to 1,500 euros eventually, according to British daily Financial Times. 
The entry of new operators into the industry, where no new licenses have been issued since 1971, is expected to lower freight costs and boost the country's GDP by about 2% in the first 12 months of implementation. 
"There is no country in the EU with a restricted freight market. Greece is the only exception," Transport Minister Dimitris Reppas said earlier this week. 
 In the final vote Wednesday, 53 members of the ruling PASOK party supported the bill and 46 members of opposition parties voted against it. 
Speaking to parliament, Reppas criticised the previous conservative government for failing to implement the much needed reform, stressing that the government is determined to push ahead despite ongoing protests. 
"Fearing the political cost and truckers' reactions, past governments have shirked from taking this initiative," he said. "This changes now. We are daring to do it." 
Overhauling the road freight industry is one of the commitments Prime Minister George Papandreou's government made earlier this year in return for a 110 billion-euro bailout package from the EU and the IMF. Under the deal, the cabinet must table -- by the end of this year -- more legislative measures paving the way for boosted competition among other professionals, including lawyers, architects and engineers. 
The full liberalisation of Greece's roughly 70 closed-shop sectors would increase the country's GDP by 10% in five years and by about 17% in the long-run, media reports quoted experts at the Athens-based IOBE research group as saying. 
But the government's plans for reforming the freight sector have sparked strong opposition from the operators in the trade, who claim that introducing cheaper trucking licenses is unfair. Many drivers, they say, have paid up to 300,000 euros to get a license under the old system. 
A several-day strike by thousands of truck and fuel-tanker owners in July depleted gas stations across the country. More than two-thirds of them were forced to close temporarily due to a lack of fuel. 
Truckers launched a new protest on September 13th, blocking some highways and busy streets in Athens. About 2,500 of them demonstrated in front of parliament Tuesday demanding the withdrawal of the liberalisation bill. 
Following the approval of the new law Wednesday, some blocked two of the main roads leading into Athens for a short while. Angry truck drivers threw stones, wooden sticks and plastic bottles at parliament and tried to storm the building, leading to a minor clash with riot police, who used tear gas to disperse the crowd of about 200. 
The truckers' unions, which have been demanding a five-year postponement of the reform law, say they are considering their next moves. 
