08/02/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 08/02/06
Four cases stemming from the interethnic conflict in Macedonia should stay at the UN war crimes tribunal and not be returned to Macedonian courts, International Crisis Group President Gareth Evans said during a visit to Skopje on 1 February. 
"The best solution would certainly be for these cases to be resolved in The Hague," Evans said, reiterating his organisation's position on the issue. "If this is not possible, the ICG and I believe it is very important not to return the cases here until the judiciary is significantly reformed and a higher level of confidence in a fair trial and application of a truly effective judiciary system is achieved among the Macedonian population." 
The four cases concern the torture of four workers from the Mavrovo Construction Company; the sabotage of the city of Kumanovo's water supply; the involvement of NLA leadership in a series of violent incidents; and the kidnapping of Macedonians in the Tetovo area. 
According to Evans, many questions surround Macedonia's judiciary, and returning the cases ahead of the upcoming parliamentary elections could create an explosive situation. 
"The judicial system remains unreformed and dysfunctional. A country of two million citizens has a backlog of some 1.2 million cases. The crippled system, which is still subject to excessive executive branch influence and corruption, suits entrenched political interests," the ICG said in its 12 January report on the country. 
In the report, the NGO recommended that the cases not be returned until at least 2008, on the grounds that doing so would disrupt interethnic relations and violate guarantees given during a disarmament campaign. 
Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski said the ICG recommendation should be taken seriously. Reforms are under way and their completion will coincide with the return of the four cases, he added. 
Parliament, meanwhile, rejected a declaration submitted by the opposition VMRO-DPMNE and VMRO-Narodna parties demanding the cases be returned to Macedonia. 
While in Skopje, Evans welcomed the EU decision to start talks on liberalising the visa regime, a move recommended by the ICG in its report. 
The report also praised police sector reform, particularly the inclusion of ethnic Albanians in the force. While critical of the judiciary, the ICG did take note of steps towards reform, particularly the adoption of related constitutional amendments. At the same time, it urged authorities to focus on implementation. 
