04/11/2009
By Sami Neza for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 04/11/09
Albanian government officials welcomed the results of the European Commission's (EC) progress report released last month. 
Prime Minister Sali Berisha said it praised Albania's efforts in all areas, and that it serves as a guide for his government's work. 
"I would definitely sign it and this report will be a work-programme for every ministry and agency of this country," Berisha said at a press conference held jointly with the EC's Tirana delegation chief, Ambassador Helmut Lohan. 
According to the report, overall relations between Albania and the EU are encouraging. "Albania has continued to make progress in addressing the political criteria in line with the European Partnership," it said, adding that the country's June parliamentary elections met "most international standards". 
"The timely adoption of the electoral code and preparation of improved voter lists, largely meets this key European partnership priority," the EC said. 
Integration Minister Majlinda Bregu affirmed that the report recognised the elections were free and fair, and that she considers the chapter on the elections now closed. However, given the politically contentious nature of the elections issue, the report triggered renewed debate in Tirana. 
Opposition Socialist Party leader Edi Rama, who is boycotting the newly-formed parliament, told media the report actually confirms his party's critical analysis. "For us, this report is an alarm bell about the electoral situation in Albania," he said. 
 Regarding visa liberalisation -- another hot issue -- the EC found that Albania has made "good progress in the areas of justice, liberty and security, but has not yet met all the benchmarks set in the roadmap". 
Brussels called on the government to make additional efforts "particularly in the area of personalisation and distribution of biometric passports, border and migration management and the institutional framework to fight organised crime and corruption". 
The fight against corruption is a key European partnership priority. According to the report, however, corruption in Albania is " prevalent in many areas and continues to be a particularly serious problem". 
It specifically mentions the controversial government decision to offer former Defence Minister Fatmir Meidiu another post after he came under investigation for the March 2008 Gerdec incident, in which a large fire caused a series of deadly explosions at an ammunitions depot. 
Assessing progress in the judicial system, the report underlines the need "to ensure credibility in the fight against corruption, a fair and transparent process to condemn all responsible persons, regardless of their position". 
The report extends concerns to other areas as well, including healthcare and the media. "Corruption remains high at almost all levels of the health sector," while "business and political interests continue to influence the independent media, in terms of editorial independence and professional capacities". 
The government's economic policies helped Albania avoid a full-blown recession, it says, but economic stability came at a price. 
"Throughout 2008, economic growth continued to accelerate, but it slowed down in 2009 due to the impact of the economic crisis resulting in reduced exports, remittances and credit. Monetary policy remained sound and price stability was maintained," it said. 
