20/04/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 20/04/05
As part of the government's efforts to bring the Greek economy up to European standards, Finance Minister George Alogoskoufis recently raised the Value Added Tax (VAT) rate from 18 per cent to 19 per cent. The change took effect on 1 April. Although the minister says the rate hike was necessary to reach the goal of reducing the national debt, it has upset entrepreneurs, who say they were only given a week to adjust their prices. 
Businesses have voiced strong objections, though the government has also lowered business taxes from 35 per cent to 25 per cent, and from 25 per cent to 20 per cent for small and medium-size enterprises. 
Both the opposition and Alogoskoufis' own New Democracy party have criticised the suddenness of the move. While acknowledging it could have negative short-term effects on the economy, Alogoskoufis argues that he had no choice. Greece is under strong pressure from the EU to reduce its deficit -- currently the highest in the Union -- to 3 per cent of the GNP by the end of 2006. To do that, the finance ministry will have to collect 2 billion euros more than initially projected. 
Brussels would never have approved a programme to shape up the economy through cuts in public spending alone, Alogoskoufis said. 
The finance ministry has announced a number of measures aimed at economic improvement. In addition to cutting expenses of public utility companies, it plans a massive effort to halt tax evasion. Due to casual misreporting as well as black and grey market activities, Greece has one of Europe's highest rates of tax evasion. The country's location, at the crossroads of three continents, makes it a prime location for goods smuggling. The ministry is now working with police to crack down on illegal imports and direct them through the proper channels, so that taxes can be collected. 
In the daily lives of Greeks, more taxes are coming. The tax on alcohol and cigarettes will rise -- cigarettes today cost 80 cents, but will rise to 1.40 euros. The state also plans to institute a tax on real estate, with new properties subject to the VAT as of 1 January 2006. The fuel tax is set to increase by two or three cents per litre, a change which will also affect heating bills. 
Finally, reduced VAT will no longer apply to the Aegean islands. The tax break had been used as an incentive for people to live there. 
Alogoskoufis has said he hopes that inflation will not increase by more than 1 per cent, and projections show it will be around 4 per cent during April. A review by the Bank of Greece, meanwhile, found that economic development in crucial industries has been slowing, with construction, textiles, tourism, commerce, insurance and passenger shipping feeling the brunt of it. 
