07/11/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 07/11/05
A chicken found dead in Macedonia did not have bird flu but was killed by Newcastle disease, according to final results from a lab in Weybridge, Great Britain. With this finding, authorities are convinced that, for now, there are no cases of avian influenza in the country. 
All international institutions were immediately informed of the findings, and Serbia and Montenegro has been asked to suspend disinfection measures at its border crossings with Macedonia. 
"We can say positively that as of this moment, there have been no bird flu cases in Macedonia," Veterinary Administration Director Slobodan Cokrevski told reporters as he presented the lab results. At the same time, he stressed that the danger is not over and that measures of precaution, monitoring and observance would continue. 
A quarantine was imposed and all domestic birds killed at the village of Mogila, near Bitola, nearly three weeks ago. The measures were taken after villagers found a number of dead chickens. Veterinary stations say they are continuing with extraordinary on-duty hours and will respond urgently to any report of a dead bird. 
Monitoring wild birds by means of new diagnostic kits will be introduced as of next week. Mobile teams of ornithologists, hunters and representatives of the Veterinary Administration have been established to visit about ten locations. Shooting of birds suspecting of carrying the virus will be carried out at these locations. 
Concerns about bird flu have led to enormous losses for Macedonian farmers. Sale of chicken meat has dropped by 90 per cent. At the Brailovo farm alone, the daily sale of eggs has plummeted from 40,000 to 20,000. Exports have been completely suspended. 
"A disaster has hit us," says Risto Tasev, director of the firm Zito Vardar. Many farmers say they will have to destroy between 30 per cent and 50 per cent of their chickens because of decreased profits. Around 3,000 people could lose their jobs. 
 On 3 November, Economy Minister Fatmir Besimi met with representatives of the poultry industry to seek ways of helping this sector. In a symbolic gesture, he said he would publicly eat chicken and eggs from Macedonian farms to prove the products are safe. 
