27/06/2005
(Various sources -- 25/06/05 - 27/06/05)
After eight years in opposition, the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) won the parliamentary elections on Saturday (25 June) and now faces the task of forming a new government. That could be a challenge, as only one of the other six parties that won parliamentary seats has signalled its readiness to join the former communists. 
"We begin negotiations on forming a government on Tuesday," BSP deputy chair Rumen Ovcharov said Sunday. "The most possible scenario is a grand coalition." 
Saturday's vote has produced the most colourful and fractured parliament in the country's 15-year post-communist history, with a total of seven parties surpassing the 4 per cent threshold for entry. 
With nearly all the votes counted, the BSP won 31 per cent of the vote, entitling the Coalition for Bulgaria it leads to 82 seats in the 240-member legislature. The current ruling party, the National Movement for Simeon II (NMS-II), came in second with 19.88 per cent, or 53 seats, and its junior coalition partner, the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), was third with 12.68 per cent, or 34 seats. 
A newcomer to the political arena, the radical nationalist organisation Attack came in fourth with 8.16 per cent or 21 seats, stunning politicians and analysts alike. It finished ahead of the right-wing United Democratic Forces (UtDF), Democrats for Strong Bulgaria (DSB) and Bulgarian Popular Union (BPU), which won 7.70 per cent or 20 seats, 6.45 per cent or 17 seats and 5.20 per cent or 13 seats, respectively. 
At a press conference late Saturday, BSP leader Sergey Stanishev, 39, said his party would seek to form "a strong and a working government". 
"We are ready to reach out to any democratic party in the name of stability," he said. The Socialists, as well as all other parties, have ruled out an alliance with Attack. 
MRF leader Ahmed Dogan has signalled his party's readiness to join a BSP-led coalition, but stressed the need for a third partner. 
"A stable cabinet without the Left cannot be seen on the horizon," Dogan said at his party's news conference Saturday. 
The NMS-II is viewed as that possible third partner. However it would have to first reach a compromise with the Socialists over the nominee for prime minister, as neither of the two parties' leaders appears ready at this point to give up their claims to the post. 
The three right-wing formations, which will together take only 50 of the parliamentary seats, are unlikely to back a BSP-led government. DSB leader and former prime minister Ivan Kostov said his party would not vote for a cabinet led by incumbent Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg either. 
President Georgi Parvanov has vowed to convene parliament as soon as possible so as to ensure a rapid formation of a government. 
Under the constitution, he is to give the mandate to the largest party first. If it fails to form a government within a week, the baton goes to the second largest. If there is still no success, the president has the right to ask any of the other parties in parliament to form a government. If it also fails, then the country will hold new elections. 
"Whatever the next government, it should be acceptable for the voters," political analyst Ivan Krastev said. "If not, the next elections will produce an even stranger result." 
