03/04/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/04/12
A black comedy that addresses the bloody history of the Yugoslav conflict is finding audiences in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia, and is being hailed for its message of peace among bitter enemies. 
"The Parade," written and directed by Srdjan Dragojevic, tells the story of a middle-aged Serbian gangster who recruits a Croatia war veteran, a Bosnian Muslim and a Albanian from Kosovo to help protect a gay rights parade in Belgrade from extremists. The group rallies together, despite being enemies in the conflict. 
"'The Parade' is, probably, the first and real, regional, movie about peace. For me, it is some kind of emotional closure," Dragojevic told SETimes. 
Released in October 2011 in Belgrade, the film has been seen by more than 600,000 people in the Balkans. It was screened in February at the Berlin International Film Festival, and is scheduled for release in December in France. It has not been shown in Kosovo. 
"We are, now, working on movie distribution in small Bosnian cities but it is still on the repertoires in big cities. If 'The Parade' continuous to be there, it will, officially, be the first move after 'Avatar,' with the longest watching period in this region," Denis Samardzic, director of cinema distribution at Zenica-based Tropik Film and Video company, told SETimes. 
Igor Tomljanovic, a Croatian film critic and editor of regional movie channel Klasik TV, said the movie’s popularity throughout the Balkans shows that people are slowing becoming less nationalistic and more open-minded. 
Ivica Josipovic, 22, a student from Zagreb, said the film changed his perspective of others. 
"I was very young when war was here, but I’ve never seen Serbs as potential friends," Josipovic told SETimes. "Now, after this movie, I am thinking of trying to find someone there, as well as in Bosnia, maybe via Facebook." 
As the most important effect of his movie, Dragojevic stressed the fact that a country can be destroyed by planes, tanks and controlled media, but it will always exist. "I think of Yugoslavia. It is destroyed but it is still here as virtual creation of all people willing to love and co-operate," Dragojevic said. 
