01/03/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast Times in Tirana -- 01/03/06
Leka Zogu, son of the former Albanian King Zog, withdrew from public life in Albania last month, saying his family would follow the example of other European royalty and stay out of politics. 
The National Development Movement (NDM), a political party established by Zogu, will be "led by elected structures," he said in a press release. 
"Considering the political situation in Albania, I withdraw from public life, and stay out of politics," Zogu said. "It is in the great interest of the Albanian state and its people. And it will serve the country and the people well." 
Zogu was only two days old when his family fled Albania during the Italian invasion in 1939. His father was deposed by the communists in 1946, and designated his son as his successor before his death in 1961. 
After years spent living in Spain, Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe) and South Africa, the son returned to Albania in 1997 in the wake of communism's collapse, hoping to regain the throne. But two-thirds of Albania's voters rejected the restoration of the monarchy in a referendum held that year, and Zogu left the country amid rioting. A court in Tirana later convicted him in absentia of organising an armed uprising. 
However, he was able to return after an amnesty was granted for his role in the unrest. Other royal family members returned in 2002, and in 2003 the government decided to grant them diplomatic passports. 
Over the past two years, the royal family has been seeking to regain properties confiscated following the monarchy's fall from power and the subsequent communist regime. According to the family's lawyer, Shefqet Dizdari, the administration of Prime Minister Sali Berisha has endorsed the return of one of the properties -- the Palace of the Princesses, once home to King Zog's sisters. 
"We have been in touch with Berisha's government staff for a month. He cannot restitute the properties, as a special body has this duty. But the government decided to allow the family to reside in one of its properties. The legal procedures are under way, so we think we will have a decision soon," Dizdari explained. 
"The building has a surface of 32,000 square metres, including the territory of several buildings around. We also hope that the royal family will take back also its properties in Durres," he added. 
The Berisha administration has made no comment about the discussions. However, authorities are preparing a draft law on restitution of the property to its former owners. 
