13/09/2010
(Reuters, Irish Examiner, Balkans.com, Emportal - 10/09/10; World Economic Forum, Bloomberg, AP, AFP, Washington Post, CNN, Swissinfo, VOA, ANA-MPA, Sofia News Agency - 09/09/10)
Greece's severe debt and deficit crisis has further eroded its competitiveness, according to the World Economic Forum's (WEF) annual survey of the most competitive economies, released on Thursday (September 9th). The country slipped 12 places, to 83rd, in the Geneva-based group's Global Competitiveness Report 2010-2011. Greece fell behind the other 26 EU member states. 
This year's study covers a record 139 economies, including all Southeast European (SEE) nations except Kosovo. Each is assigned a ranking on the basis of a broad range of factors of competitiveness, grouped into 12 pillars. They include institutions, infrastructure, macroeconomic environment, health and primary education, higher education and training, goods market efficiency, labour market efficiency, financial market development, technological readiness, market size, business sophistication, and innovation. 
The report also reflects an opinion poll of more than 13,500 business leaders in the surveyed countries. 
Switzerland remained the world's most competitive economy for a second year in a row, the WEF said. Sweden, Singapore and the United States came next, while Burundi, Angola and Chad were placed at the bottom of the study's Global Competitiveness Index (GCI). 
 "Switzerland retains its first-place position, characterised by an excellent capacity for innovation and a very sophisticated business culture," said the report, co-authored by chief adviser Xavier Sala-i-Martin of Columbia University in New York. 
Aside from Greece, four other SEE countries -- Croatia, Cyprus, Romania and Serbia -- also fared worse than they did last year, while another five, led by Montenegro, improved their standings. Turkey, which moved up to the 61st place in the previous GCI, was the only among the countries in the region to retain its position. 
"Greece shows a dismal performance in 2010 due to the severe deterioration of its macroeconomic environment, adding to a particularly poor institutional setup and low efficiency of markets," EU Commissioner for Competition Policy Joaquin Almunia wrote in the WEF report, as a guest author. 
The polled business leaders listed inefficient government bureaucracy, corruption, restrictive labour regulations, policy instability and tax regulations as the five most problematic factors for doing business in Greece, the Geneva-based group said. 
Romania and Serbia dropped three slots each to 67th and 96th, respectively, in this year's survey. Croatia fell a further five places to 77th and Cyprus was ranked 40th, down from 34th in the WEF's 2009 report. 
Montenegro became the only other SEE country to make it into the group of the 50 most competitive economies in the world, after jumping 13 places to 49th in the new CGI. Its better standing this year reflects the higher marks it received on ten of the 12 pillars of competitiveness. The only two on which it fared worse were financial market development and market size. 
The top five most problematic factors for doing business in Montenegro, in the business leaders' opinion, included inadequate supply of infrastructure, access to financing, inefficient government bureaucracy, inadequately educated workforce and corruption. 
 Bulgaria and Macedonia, which climbed five slots each, took the 71st and the 79th positions, respectively, while Albania moved up eight notches to 88th. While Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) vaulted from 109th to 102nd this year, it remained the region's laggard on competitiveness. 
 Business leaders cited "access to financing" as the most problematic factor in doing business in BiH. The other four on the list of the top five were tax rates, inefficient government bureaucracy, corruption and tax regulations. 
Sala-i-Martin urged leaders not to lose sight of the factors essential to long-term growth and development while trying to deal with problems posed by the global crisis. 
"Amid concerns about the outlook for the global economy, policy-makers must not lose sight of long-term competitiveness fundamentals amid short-term challenges," he said. "For economies to remain competitive, they must ensure that they have in place those factors driving the productivity enhancements on which their present and future prosperity is built." 
