10/12/2009
By Barış Yılmaz for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 10/12/09
At least 200 football games were manipulated by a German-based gang, according to a recent investigation. Called the " biggest match-fixing scandal ever to hit Europe", the probe centred on domestic league games in nine European countries -- Germany, Belgium, Switzerland, Croatia, Slovenia, Turkey, Hungary, Bosnia and Hercegovina and Austria. Also investigated were 12 qualifying matches in the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) Europa League, and three in the UEFA Champions League. 
On November 19th, 15 suspects were arrested, including several Turks and Croats. The group is suspected of having earned up to 10m euros in the fraud. 
Twenty-nine of the allegedly fixed matches took place in Turkey, according to German press reports. A friendly match between Turkey's Fenerbahçe and Germany's Ulm in July -- where Ulm lost 5-0 -- is under scrutiny, according to the German Bild newspaper. 
At least two other matches from Turkey's top Super Lig were investigated for having been fixed. 
Ilhan Cavcav, president of Ankara's Genclerbirligi sports club, said he has been asked twice to fix matches. He turned down both offers. 
Cavcav also claims that two Genclerbirligi players were involved in match-fixing during the '85-'86 season. Both were kicked off the team. 
"As we have witnessed, those who betrayed football in the past, now live in poverty. That is the case with these players," he told the daily Hurriyet. 
Following Cavcav's statements, the Turkish Football Federation launched an official investigation of match-fixing claims in the Super Lig. 
The scandal has put pressure on the Turkish government to better investigate sports manipulation. Sports Minister Faruk Ozak says there is still no clear punishment for match-fixing in the country's legal system, and he promises to amend Turkey's criminal code, adding heavy penalties. 
Ozak says Turkey contacted German authorities concerning the probe, asking for information and evidence. "We are committed to eradicate sports manipulation. This is our duty," he said. 
Apart from Germany and Turkey, dozens of matches in European and Balkan leagues were also reportedly manipulated. The scope of the scandal led UEFA to hold an extraordinary meeting with officials of nine national football federations in order to share confidential information on suspected matches. UEFA further launched its own detailed investigation in seven European club competitions under its jurisdiction. 
The manipulation of football matches has long been a concern, but with the fast growing online betting sector, the problem has become more widespread. FIFA estimates that 100 billion euros are placed on football bets every year. 
