11/03/2011
By Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul –11/03/11
This week Turkey stood firm against military intervention and economic sanctions against the regime of Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi. According to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, such measures are unnecessary and would only harm civilians. 
"All sanctions and interventions that amount to a punishment of the Libyan people could trigger big and unacceptable problems," Erdogan said last week. 
According to some analysts, however, Ankara's views on Libya are a departure from the proactive role it played during Egypt's demonstrations, when Turkey became the first country to demand that Egyptian leader Hosni Mubarak step down. 
"Turkey's reaction to the events in Libya has indeed been markedly different from the position it took in the case of Egypt," Halil Karaveli, a Turkey expert from the Central Asia-Caucasus Institute & Silk Road Studies Programme, tells SETimes. 
Why is Turkey hesitant to speak out more strongly against Gaddafi? 
"The short answer is business interests," Karaveli said. 
Turkish projects in Libya are valued at $15.3 billion, and the trade between the countries amounted to an estimated $2.4 billion in 2010. According to Ankara's export planners, Turkey's arms trade in the Middle East and North Africa has not been affected by the turmoil. Defence exports are expected to total $1.5 billion this year. 
"Turkey has strong economic interests in Libya. Thousands of Turkish expatriates work in the country, and many of them have chosen not to leave the conflict-ridden country," said Bilkent University Professor Ioannis Grigoriadis. 
However, Libyan rebels seem to want Turkey to take a stronger stance. 
Turkey's Anatolian news agency reported earlier this week that Abdel Hafiz Ghoga, deputy leader of the National Libyan Council created by the anti-Gaddafi rebels, demanded Turkey officially recognise and support the Libyan people's revolution. 
According to Professor Yasin Aktay of Selcuk University, Ankara is hesitant to give active support to such opposition groups because there is no unanimous front demanding Gaddafi's resignation. 
"Turkey does not want to favour one group over another when there is a possibility of a civil war," Aktay said. "Egypt was different. There was a consensus of the people demanding Mubarak go." 
Even though Turkey opposes NATO intervention in Libya, it would support a no-fly zone backed by the UN. Erdogan changed his mind over the issue after Gaddafi's airstrikes against the rebel forces continued, the Turkish newspaper Sabah reported on Thursday (March 10th). 
Many members of the media are criticising Erdogan's decision against the military intervention, saying it makes Turkey look too close to Gaddafi. A human rights award granted to Erdogan no less than three months ago by Gaddafi's family foundation has also been questioned. 
Yet, Erdogan refuses to give up the prize. 
According to experts, Turkey is unlikely to change its mind in regard to its "cautious" position. 
"Ankara is afraid of Gaddafi's irrational behaviour," said Aktay. "Turkey wants to be careful not to provoke Gaddafi." 
"I don't expect that the Turkish government will take a clear position in favour of the insurgency in Libya, unless it becomes clear that they will be the winning side," said Grigoriadis. 
