11/06/2004
(AP, Reuters, Radio B92, Deutsche Welle - 10/06/04; UN News Centre - 07/06/04; UNMIK - 25/05/04)
Speaking at a farewell press conference in Pristina, outgoing UNMIK chief Harri Holkeri warned that peace in Kosovo hinges on the international community's continued efforts to stabilise the province. He also called for steps to improve Kosovo's stagnant economic and for a quick solution to the problem of its final status.
"If the international community gives up here, that would be a carte blanche for terrorism, for violence, all kind of actions against humanity," Holkeri said Thursday (10 June).
Kosovo was placed under UN administration in mid-June 1999, following NATO's 78-day campaign. On 25 May, about ten months after replacing Michael Steiner as Kosovo's fourth UN governor, Holkeri announced his resignation, citing health reasons.
"A handful of people are trying to destroy the future of ordinary citizens here in Kosovo. Don't let them do that," the former Finnish prime minister said Thursday, less than three months after the worst outbreak of violence in Kosovo, which left 19 people dead and hundreds of others injured.
"I am very much concerned because the security situation now in Kosovo is very fragile," Holkeri added, stressing that violence would remain a threat to peace in the province until economic stagnation has been addressed.
Citing a World Bank study released Thursday, Reuters reported that Kosovo has the lowest GDP in Europe -- less than 660 euros per capita annually. Over 57 per cent of the province's population of 2 million is reportedly unemployed. About 37 per cent of Kosovo's people reportedly live on less than 1.5 euros a day. With donor support and handouts on the decline, economic growth in the province is under threat, the Bank warned.
"If people are poor, if they are living under the poverty line, they are very easily extremists," said Holkeri. "They are ready for barricades, ready to kill their neighbours and follow all kinds of extremist signals."
While the ethnic Serb minority wants Kosovo to remain part of Serbia-Montenegro, the Kosovo Albanian majority, comprising about 90 per cent of the province's population, is pushing for independence. On Thursday, special police cordoned off the UNMIK headquarters in central Pristina as hundreds of Kosovo Albanian protesters gathered outside demanding a revision of UN Security Council Resolution 1244.
The international community has listed a set of standards Kosovo must achieve as a pre-condition for opening talks on its future status. A decision to that end will be made following a review of the progress in implementing the standards, which is expected to take place in mid-2005.
