05/11/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/11/08
NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer paid a brief visit to Kosovo on Tuesday (November 4th) for talks on the future of EULEX. He was accompanied by members of the North Atlantic Council (NAC) -- the Alliance's senior decision-making body. The group met with KFOR Commander, General Giuseppe Emilio Guy, as well as with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and representatives of Kosovo's minority Serbs. 
According to media reports, Scheffer's visit was part of efforts to reach a compromise over deployment of EULEX, the EU mission that is expected to replace UNMIK. Serbia has opposed the move because it is part of former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's "supervised independence" for Kosovo, which Belgrade rejects. Russia backs Serbia's stance and has blocked the Ahtisaari plan at the UN Security Council. 
Last month, however, Serbian President Boris Tadic indicated a compromise is possible. He said his country is willing to accept the deployment of EULEX provided three conditions are met: it deploys with the approval of the UN Security Council, the mission's status is neutral and the Ahtisaari plan remains unimplemented. 
Thaci has already rejected the possibility of not deploying EULEX in Serb-dominated northern Kosovo. "EULEX will be deployed throughout the territory of Kosovo without any conditions attached," he said. 
During his stop in Pristina, Scheffer also confirmed that NATO would assist in dissolving the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) and helping create the Kosovo Security Force (KSF). 
"NATO supports the new Security Force in Kosovo, which will start functioning by the middle of June 2009 after the disbandment of the KPC," he said. 
Transition from the KPC to the KSF is called for in the Ahtisaari plan, which NATO has not recognised. Despite this, de Hoop Scheffer said, the Alliance will give its support to the KSF. 
Observers expect disbandment of the 5,000-member KPC by December 10th. They expect the KSF, which will have only 2,500 active troops, to deploy by June 2009. 
On Wednesday, British Foreign Secretary David Miliband visits Belgrade and Pristina in a bid to reach a compromise before the UN Security Council meets again to discuss Kosovo. He is the first UK foreign secretary to visit Kosovo since 2002. 
