06/08/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 06/08/10
Croatian political dignitaries gathered in Knin on Thursday (August 5th) to commemorate the 15th anniversary of Operation Storm, the military action that ended the war in Croatia. Since 1995, the anniversary has been celebrated in Croatia as Victory and Homeland Thanksgiving Day. 
Speaking at the ceremony, Croatian President Ivo Josipovic focused as much on Croatia's future as on its past. He called for renewed attention to the country's social needs. 
 "There should be no one hungry in Croatia, no youth without perspective or without the chance of a proper education, and all disabled persons should have the chance to attend a rehabilitation programme, receive the opportunity to work and enjoy a normal life," he said. 
Operation Storm is a bitter point of contention between Croatia and Serbia, and Josipovic, who has worked to boost diplomatic ties, was clear about where to place the blame for conflict that consumed the Balkans during the 1990s. 
It was former Yugoslav strongman Slobodan Milosevic's policies which brought evil to the region, to Croatia and Serbia and to all the people living in the area, he said. 
"Our victory is honourable and does not give anyone the right to retaliate," he said. 
Croatia's prime minister, Jadranka Kosor, said that as a NATO member and soon-to-be EU member, Croatia wants the region to become an example of stability and peace. She also adamantly defended the 1995 operation. 
"It is an historical fact that Croatia was brutally attacked and that the tanks came from Serbia," Kosor said. "They destroyed Croatian towns and killed Croatian soldiers and civilians. We will not allow revision of the historical facts, not concerning any topic and especially not concerning the military actions that liberated Croatia for good." 
"We had the right to defend our country in the name of the future of our children," she said. "We will celebrate Operation Storm because that is how we celebrate victory and peace." The view from Belgrade remains starkly different. On Wednesday, Serbian President Boris Tadic met with families of missing persons, and said "the crimes cannot be forgotten". 
Operation Storm was a large scale action that lasted 84 hours and amounted to the biggest European land offensive since World War II. It started early on August 4th 1995, and ended with Croatia regaining control of areas occupied by Serb separatists since 1991. 
While the victory was decisive, it also had a human cost. According to UN sources, between 150,000 and 200,000 people fled the area as a result of the operation. Croatian sources narrow the number to 90,000 refugees, while Serbian sources claim between 200,000 and 250,000 Serbs were displaced. 
The number of civilian deaths is also disputed. The Croatian Helsinki Committee says 116 people were killed, while the Serbian NGO Veritas puts the number at 1,200. At the same time, 184 Croatian soldiers died and 1,430 were wounded. 
