09/07/2008
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 09/07/08
Faltering optimism over Croatia's EU prospects after the Irish rejection of the Lisbon Treaty in June received a much-needed boost at Croatia Summit 2008 last weekend. The prime ministers of Albania, Croatia, Hungary, Kosovo, Montenegro and Slovakia, as well as Georgian President Mikhail Saakashvili, assembled in Dubrovnik for the landmark event. 
"Croatia will complete the technical part of negotiations by the end of 2009; however, it will take another year for ratification and joining the EU," said David Daly, the head of the Department of Croatia at the European Commission's General Administration. 
 "There is still time to find a solution to the problems caused by the Lisbon Treaty. Croatia should not get confused on its European path," pointed out Daly, who also reminded the Croatian officials of the importance of fighting corruption and organised crime. 
His words were welcomed by Croatian officials at the conference, which focused on the EU prospects for the region and issues related to security, progress and prosperity. 
 "Croatia was not discouraged by the failure of some EU member states to approve the Lisbon Treaty. The EU always finds solutions to serious problems, so I believe it will this time too … not only for the new members but for itself," Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said. 
Sanader also said that the Southeast European countries have the right to achieve their goals and that the EU integration of the region is of common interest to the EU and the Balkans. 
 ''I'm sure that all of the 27 countries will accept the Lisbon Treaty. I also hope that will happen during Croatia's negotiation process," added Sanader. 
The conference also gathered representatives from 30 other countries, including those from the EU and NATO. A number of high-ranking guests stated EU enlargement need not bear a direct connection to the Lisbon Treaty. 
 "The EU enlargement could continue even without the Lisbon Treaty. That is a question of political will and not a legal issue. Croatia has nothing to fear as the Irish did not say no because of the Western Balkans," said Czech Deputy Prime Minister Alexandr Vondra. He also added that Croatia has no other path but to join the EU. 
Slovak Prime Minister Robert Fico agreed that the Lisbon Treaty derailment should not block Croatia's EU membership. "The EU should be ready to accept Croatia once Zagreb fulfills the official membership criteria," Fico said. 
