13/01/2012
By Bedrana Kaletović for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 13/01/12
Some of the retired soldiers who protested in front of the state parliament late last month over delayed pension payments had their demands realised on Wednesday (January 11th), when the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina House of Peoples approved a budget that allocates 170 euros a month, per soldier. 
Their colleagues from the RS are not so lucky; the Serb entity has yet to earmark funds for its retired military. But in an unprecedented move, each retired member of the Federation army will donate about 10 euros of their monthly income, creating a pension of sorts for the retired RS soldiers. 
Last month, the government proposed an estimated 515m-euro budget for 2012 -- which was speedily approved by parliament in the 48 hours between the government formation and the new year. 
Although the budget earmarks 8m euros for the pensions, many are skeptical. 
"The politicians are aware that they cannot play with us. We defended the country and we want our money," one protester, who wished to remain anonymous for fear of government reprisals, told SETimes. 
According to the data from the United Retirees of FBiH, around 60% of retirees live below the poverty line. 
"The life of retirees is hard. A low standard of living bothers us, as well as inadequate healthcare," said Omer Omerfendic, president of the Retirees Association of FBiH. 
Omerfendic still hopes that the new state government will keep the promise it made a few years ago to raise pensions, although the chances of that happening may be low with this budget estimate. 
Administrative workers have a more realistic hope for a salary increase under the estimate. More than 120,000 of them receive their salaries from all government levels' budgets. 
"Public expenses in our country are [more than] 60% of GDP, which is a lot more than the countries in the region or the EU, where public expenses are around 35.8% of GDP," Esad Duric, financial advisor to the Tulza chamber of economy, told SETimes. 
Representation of Citzens' Interests Centre Director Damir Mehmedbasic told SETimes that a budget which keeps the social peace is not viable. 
"A high level of social contributions in BiH are unsustainable because the means are not paid out -- they go into pockets of the privileged. Besides dealing with one of the greatest injustices, an inefficient division of social contributions also presents an obstacle for progress," he said. 
It is anticipated that in 2012, public institutions will spend a record 4.5m euros. Although there have been promises to be more economical, the temporary budget does not reflect that. 
"In 2013, BiH will begin to restore a credit under Stand-by Arrangement with the IMF. [This year, FBiH] has to pay off bonds for old foreign currency savings and war claims. All this will create a huge budget deficit," said Mehmedbasic. 
