17/07/2006
(Deutsche Welle - 17/07/06; AFP, AP, Reuters, DPA, Zaman - 16/07/06)
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan suggested on Sunday (16 July) that Ankara is considering tougher security measures against Kurdish rebels after two new incidents, in which 13 members of the country's security forces were killed. 
Seven Turkish troops and a village guard were killed in a clash with members of the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) near the town of Eruh in southeastern Siirt province late Saturday. In another incident blamed on the PKK, five soldiers died and four others were injured Thursday when their vehicle hit a landmine on a rural road in the Bitlis province. 
"This PKK terror organisation has continued its attacks ruthlessly," Reuters quoted Erdogan as saying in a televised speech during a visit Sunday to the eastern city of Agri. "We have so far tried to be patient and solve the issue in a democratic manner. But yet again they killed eight children of ours. This is no longer bearable." 
Speaking ahead of a security meeting and a subsequent government meeting Monday, the prime minister said "major decisions" would be taken, but did not elaborate. "We will never be daunted in our fight against terrorism," Erdogan stressed. "We will continue this fight until the very end." 
Seeking the establishment of Kurdish self-rule in Turkey's southeast, the PKK led a 15-year armed conflict against government forces, which left some 37,000 people dead. Following the capture of its leader, Abdullah Ocalan, the party declared a unilateral cease-fire in 1999, but called it off in June 2004 and resumed its attacks.
The violence escalated in recent months following the deployment of an additional 40,000 Turkish troops to the country's border with Iraq in April. The Turkish military believes some 5,000 Kurdish rebels have found shelter in northern Iraq, where they cross into Turkey. 
According to the AFP, at least 85 Kurdish rebels and 50 members of the Turkish security forces have been killed this year in southeastern Turkey. Nearly ten people have died and another about 140 have been injured in various bomb attacks, for which the Kurdish militants have claimed responsibility. 
The PKK is recognized as a terrorist organisation by Turkey, the EU and the United States. 
Following the two latest incidents, Turkey's High Anti-Terrorism Council, composed of high-ranking military, civilian, police and intelligence officials, met on Sunday to discuss possible new measures against the Kurdish rebels. 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul chaired the extraordinary meeting, which was also attended by the interior and justice ministers, Abdulkadir Aksu and Cemil Cicek. In the wake of the attack on security troops near the town of Eruh on Saturday night, helicopter gunships were sent to the region early Sunday to bombard suspected PKK hideouts, while commandoes pursued militants on the ground. The private Dogan news agency reported that some tanks and armoured personnel carriers also were dispatched to the area.
 
