26/12/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 26/12/06
Improving inter-border co-operation, with an eye to EU integration, was the focus of a conference held last week in Tirana. Representatives from Macedonia, Kosovo and the international community attended the event, including the European Commission (EC), which is allocating specific funds for inter-border co-operation. 
The closer ties the neighbouring countries, the shorter Albania's path to the EU will be, said Integration Minister Arenca Trashani, chairman of the meeting. 
"Inter-border co-operation is important as the main component of profit for us and also as a success story of implementing future programmes in the neighbouring countries, in the framework of a new financial instrument that replaces CARDS projects with those of pre-adhering projects," Trashani said. 
According to the minister, this co-operation should take place not only at the central government level, but also via the local authorities. 
"The main actors in implementing inter-border co-operation are the municipalities or the authorities of the regions close to the borders," Trashani said. "We should encourage them to go ahead with mutual projects in different areas such as infrastructure, environment and culture." 
Albania, which has signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU, is bordered by two EU member states -- Greece to the south and Italy to the west. To the north are Kosovo and newly independent Montenegro. To the east lies Macedonia, which has the status of candidate for EU membership. 
Macedonian Secretariat for European Affairs assistant Maja Handizka said her country is keen to improve border infrastructure with Albania and co-operate in other areas. 
"Among the priorities which will be included in the inter-border co-operation programmes with Albania will be the improvement of the infrastructure conditions at the border check-points. We also are thinking of boosting the inter-border co-operation through projects in the environmental field," she said. 
The EU's cross-border co-operation programme has offered Albania a further opportunity to open up the country and to develop closer links with its immediate Union-member neighbours. The cross-border co-operation programme also provides support to overcome the socio-economic gap between Albanian and Greek border regions. 
The Albanian-Italian cross-border co-operation focuses on regions of Albania that have a common maritime border with Italy, with the goal of improving and expanding transport infrastructure. 
Earlier this year, meanwhile, Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha urged local authorities in Shkodra to co-operate with the Montenegrin authorities in exchanging intelligence and creating new areas for inter-regional co-operation. 
