20/10/2005
(OHR Morning Media Brief - 20/10/05; AP, AFP, EUobserver, FENA - 19/10/05; OHR - 18/10/05)
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Wednesday (19 October) he would recommend to the bloc that it launch talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), considered a first step towards eventual membership. He announced his decision a day after the BiH Parliament approved an agreement on police restructuring in the country, thus fulfilling a key EU condition. 
"I welcome the recent progress on the police reform," Rehn said in a statement issued after his meeting in Brussels with BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic. "This is positive news and will allow me to recommend (to the European Commission and the governments of the member nations) to open the negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement." 
While the commissioner did not specify a particular starting date for the talks, they are widely expected to begin on 12 December, two days ahead of the 10th anniversary of the signing in Paris of the Dayton Peace Agreement. The accord ended the more than three-year conflict in BiH. 
"The start of SAA negotiations will help put BiH irreversibly on course to effective statehood," the international community's High Representative in BiH, Paddy Ashdown, said in a statement Tuesday. "From now on, BiH has a clear view of its future." 
Stressing that adopted reforms need to be properly carried out, Rehn cautioned Wednesday that the EC "will continue to monitor the police reform closely and we will want to see progress in the implementation during the SAA negotiations". 
The approved plan for police restructuring in BiH envisions the creation of a single police force at the state level, which is free of political interference and has the power to cross entity boundaries in the execution of its duties. 
Rehn urged the authorities to ensure that the next step -- the establishment of a directorate for police reform implementation by 31 December -- is completed on time and to continue paying full attention to the reform. 
He warned that BiH could face "delays in concluding the negotiations," if it fails to make progress in the implementation of EU required reforms and to honour its commitments. 
Meanwhile, in an interview with the Belgium-based EUobserver, Terzic said Wednesday that BiH hopes to complete the talks with the EU in less than a year. 
"In October we will have general elections, and I would like my country to sign an SAA agreement before the end of my mandate," he said. 
