31/01/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 31/01/06
The party of the late Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova has chosen a candidate to succeed him. Fatmir Sejdiu, 54, is a law professor, member of parliament and secretary general of the ruling Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), founded in 1989 by Rugova and other Kosovo intellectuals. If elected, he will head Pristina's team for the negotiations on the final status of Kosovo. 
"After long discussions, the LDK with complete consensus has decided to nominate Fatmir Sejdiu as a Kosovo president," the party said in a press release after a meeting Monday (30 January). 
"We will respect the national mourning days for President Rugova. But, also we are aware that we can't delay the process," Local Self-Government Minister Lutfi Haziri explained, adding that a president must be chosen in order for the negotiations process to proceed. Haziri was to have led Kosovo's delegation to a Vienna session on decentralisation, but the talks were postponed due to Rugova's death. 
According to the UN's special envoy for Kosovo status talks, Martti Ahtisaari, they will now be held in early February. 
"I am sure that everyone will support the efforts to find a best solution for Kosovo," he said after a Friday meeting with EU security chief Javier Solana, who reportedly supports Sejdiu's candidacy. 
"The fact that the UN did not ask me for a long-term job implies and is an encouraging sign that Kosovo's status will be resolved by the end of the year," Ahtisaari added. 
On Monday, the EU Council issued a statement praising Rugova and calling for Kosovo to press ahead with the implementation of internationally set standards. The statement, issued after a Council session, said Rugova had played a historic role in promoting the rights of Kosovo's people. It also called on all institutions and politicians in Kosovo to work together for the realisation of set reforms and to ensure constructive participation in the status process. 
