15/11/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/11/10 
The European Commission's November 9th report on Serbia is a mixed bag. On the positive side, it praises Belgrade for advancing democratisation and regional co-operation, and for steps taken to rebuild the economy. 
"The government has remained stable and continues to express a high degree of consensus on accession to the European Union as the strategic priority," the report says. 
At the same time, though, it finds that judicial reform has been poorly executed and the fight against organised crime remains inconsistent. 
"Serbia has made little progress in harmonising its judicial system with European standards, which is the key priority for [the] European partnership," it says, criticising Belgrade for the non-transparent re-election of judges and prosecutors, and for failing to rein in corruption. 
Vincent Degert, chief of the EU's delegation to Serbia, noted that the report is generally positive, but said the progress that has been achieved is uneven. Serbian authorities have a lot more left to do in the process of European integration, he said. 
Commenting on the report's criticisms, Serbia Judges Association President Dragana Boljevic told SETimes that Belgrade must now "admit it has made mistakes in reforming the judiciary", and launch "a broad dialogue to help solve those problems". 
Boljevic explained her association had warned about judges and prosecutors' re-election omissions, but the government ignored the warnings. 
Anti-Corruption Agency board member Zlatko Minic told SETimes the authorities must first start working on the complex process of preventing corruption. He said that the announced new law on the funding of political parties will also be especially important in the struggle against corruption. 
"Police, prosecutors' offices and courts need to be able to work freely, transparently and without political pressure," Minic said. 
He warned the government should also ensure against the same kind of failure as in amending regulations regarding individuals holding multiple posts, an item mentioned in the report. 
In addition to the areas specified for improvement, the main condition for Serbia's joining the EU is to complete co-operation with The Hague tribunal by arresting the two remaining indictees, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic. 
 Authorities announced they will work on all objections issued by the EC. 
 "All of us are essentially determined to support independent anti-corruption institutions and a permanent dialogue with the EC and the professional associations, which will help us complete the judicial reform," Justice Minister Snezana Malovic said. 
The government announced an action plan to address the criticised areas a day after the report was issued. The plan will be passed before EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele's visit to Belgrade on November 24th, when Belgrade officials will be handed the questionnaire for EU candidate status. 
 "We have a new rendezvous with Europe scheduled for next year, a promising rendezvous for gaining candidate status and, potentially, for the beginning of membership negotiations," said Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Bozidar Djelic. 
