14/09/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 14/09/06
US Deputy Undersecretary of State Rosemary DiCarlo and the EU's special envoy for Kosovo, Stefan Lehne, arrived in Pristina on Wednesday (13 September) for talks with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu and to repeat the US and EU stance that Kosovo's status should be settled this year. 
"We are committed to realising the Contact Group principles and we reconfirm that a negotiable solution should be settled within 2006. We encourage flexibility by both parties in order to achieve an acceptable end of the status process," DiCarlo said. The eventual solution should be one that ensures a secure Kosovo for all citizens and provides efficient mechanisms for the protection of minority rights, she added. 
Both officials emphasised the need for an international civil and military presence in Kosovo after the status issue is resolved. "The international community backs the Contact Group principles, according to which the civil and military presence will follow the status decision," Lehne said. He stressed that the EU wants the province to fulfil as many standards as possible -- particularly in respect to minorities. 
Lehne welcomed a letter written by Sejdiu on behalf of the Kosovo Albanian negotiators. In it, he said his team agreed with the deployment of international forces for as long as necessary. 
"We have shown that we want a military presence in Kosovo for the time that we need that," Sejdiu wrote. "The Kosovo side will work closely with [UN envoy] Martti Ahtisaari's office and with the international community in general." 
DiCarlo and Lehne met with the Kosovo Albanian negotiating team and with minority representatives. They also visited three northern municipalities -- Leposavic, Zubin Potok and Zvecan. 
Meanwhile, UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker is warning against a delay in resolving the status issue. Addressing a UN Security Council meeting on Kosovo, he said such a delay could lead to unrest and instability in the province, and would disrupt the process of ethnic reconciliation and economic recovery. 
Tensions are likely to rise as the status negotiations near their end, Ruecker said. He urged Serbs to end their boycott of the province's institutions, saying their future lies in integration rather than isolation. 
The Serbian representative at the Security Council meeting, Sandra Raskovic-Ivic, was critical of Ruecker's statements. In particular, she argued that there should be no "artificial" deadlines for resolving the status issue and that hastiness would not lead to sustainable solution. 
