14/05/2009
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 14/05/09
"Of course I didn't want to leave yet. But I'm taking it with a smile, and I'll carry on," Alexandra Zhekova said Wednesday (May 13th) night, just minutes after she dropped out of the third season of Bulgarian TV's "Music Idol". 
With her powerful voice, the 19-year-old Sofian was among the favourites for the title. Although she sang her heart out in the "battle of the voices" against Rusina Katardzhieva, 22, late Wednesday, Zhekova could not reach the next round. One song she performed for the show was John Lennon's "Jealous Guy". 
 "Music Idol" is the Bulgarian version of the British television show "Pop Idol". Its third edition kicked off in March. Macedonian contestants this season represent the programme's first foreign contestants. 
 "Music Idol 3" airs on two private, national television channels, Bulgaria's bTV and Macedonia's A1. Viewers in both countries vote for their favourites by sending text messages. 
Zhekova, one of 13 young Bulgarians and Macedonians who survived several selection rounds before the start of the finals in March, became the seventh to drop out of the contest Wednesday. 
The six remaining "Music Idol 3" hopefuls include four Bulgarian and two Macedonian singers. All have equal chances of winning the contest and a contract with Bulgarian record company Virginia Records. 
Alexander Tarabunov, 19, of Skopje is the youngest among them. He and the other Macedonian survivor in the show -- 24-year-old Bojan Stoykov of Bitola -- are considered among the top contenders for this year's title. 
But Katardzhieva and the other three Bulgarians -- Magdalena Dzhanavarova, 21, Preslava Mruvkova, 22, and Dimitar Atanasov, 23, are extremely talented too, making each of them a potential winner. 
In an interview following her elimination, Zhekova said Stoykov would be her favourite for the title. 
Aside from the international aspect, this year's "Music Idol" has become one of the most emotional so far. A Bulgarian finalist, 26-year-old Victoria Dimitrova, who lost her vision to domestic violence, became the first blind participant in the show. 
