06/07/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 06/07/09 Photos by Nikola Barbutov 
Serbia is considered a "free" nation, according to a Freedom House report released last year, and its government continues to make efforts toward addressing human rights concerns. However, problems still loom, such as discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities, like Roma, gender inequality and nearly half of Serbia's state institutions are not user-friendly, or even accessible, to the disabled. 
Ombudsman Sasa Jankovic is at the forefront of sounding the alarm on human rights violations. The ombudsman reacts when regular court procedures fail to deliver, and state bodies jeopardise the very human rights they are supposed to uphold. 
Jankovic recently sat down with Southeast European Times contributor Bojana Milovanovic to discuss what is being done to beef up the country's human rights game plan. 
 Southeast European Times: What problems do Serbian citizens most frequently bring to you? 
 Sasa Jankovic: The majority of citizens come with economic and social problems, i.e. rights in the field of labor and social protection. A large number of complaints refer to poor administration, slow work and pointless administrative procedures of authorized bodies. We run into a number of cases in which, when a court reaches a verdict, the administrative body meant to carry out that verdict fails to do so. 
 SETimes: How do you think Serbia is doing in the protection of human rights? Has there been progress since 2000, when the democratic parties assumed power? 
 Jankovic: Although formally we all have the same rights, the fact is that certain parts of the population, such as, for example, the Roma, are in a very different position when it comes to the accessibility of rights. That accessibility varies conspicuously depending on whether one belongs to one of the vulnerable groups. There are Serbian citizens whose rights are being protected and implemented to a great extent, but there are also those fighting for the implementation of basic human rights, such as the right to a home or the right to work. 
I think that Serbia has done a lot since 2000 in terms of raising citizens' awareness of the importance of implementing human rights, especially of vulnerable groups of the population. 
 SETimes: What is the greatest human rights issue that faces Serbia today and in the future? 
 Jankovic: I believe that as a state we should resolve issues related to human rights that should not be put in question as soon as possible -- the arrest of war crimes indictees and hate speech. While we are spending time on matters that should not be controversial, issues such as the right to education or health care remain in the background. I will be very happy when matters regarding discrimination no longer require [proof]. 
 SETimes: What are the main groups in Serbia affected by human right violations? 
 Jankovic: The most endangered are the Roma, in all aspects -- from the mortality rate to health care and the implementation of status and political rights. As a group, they deserve special attention. Disabled individuals also have trouble implementing their rights, as a group that was traditionally pushed into the background for decades. Today they have to fight for basic rights such as access to institutions. Wheelchair-bound and sight impaired people cannot enter 50% of state institutions in Serbia. The state should also deal with the principle of implementing gender equality. A big step forward has been taken there, but there are still many situations in which women cannot exercise their rights in the same way as men. 
 SETimes: What is your view on the implementation of human rights in Serbia compared to other Balkan countries? 
 Jankovic: I do not think Serbia is lagging behind other countries in the region in terms of implementing human rights at the moment. However, one of the difficulties we face is the constant comparison and advocating of the idea that we are doing something [to be] better than others, or [to join] those who may be better than us at something. Human rights exist so that every single citizen can enjoy them, not in order for us to be better than our neighbors or to join the EU. 
 SETimes: Are you satisfied with Serbian legislation in the field of human rights and its application and what do you think needs to be done in Serbia's judicial sector? 
 Jankovic: We have solid legislation when it comes to human rights. The problem is that there is a big gap between what is on paper, what politicians promise and what happens in practice. No law in Serbia provides grounds for discrimination, or is in discord with basic human rights standards. One of the things missing in our legislation, which is important for the protection of citizens' rights, is the principle of protecting those who, with good intentions, unveil illegal actions to the public. Nearly everyone who has ever revealed certain illegal actions in Serbia has had to suffer negative consequences, and that is a bad signal to all citizens. 
 SETimes: How much influence do you have in solving citizens' problems and implementing their rights? 
 Jankovic: I would be lying if I said I would not like that influence to be bigger. One should bear in mind that the ombudsman is a new institution in Serbia, and that I am the first protector of citizens appointed merely two years ago. It took time to get used to the fact that there is an ombudsman. Over 90% of the ombudsman's recommendations on how to fix irregularities discovered in work have been carried out, and I am very satisfied with that fact. 
