05/10/2006
(Focus news Agency, Nine o'Clock, B92 - 05/10/06; AP, Reuters, DPA, UPI, Sofia news Agency, Mediapool, B92 - 04/10/06; Reuters, DPA - 03/10/06; Sofia News Agency - 02/10/06)
As Bulgaria and Romania sought to minimise damage from a large oil slick on the Danube, Serbia confirmed on Wednesday (October 4th) that a local company could have been partly responsible. In a statement, the Serbian agriculture, forestry and water management industry acknowledged that fuel oil had leaked into the river from the NIS oil company's plant in Prahovo. 
"There are two types of distinct pollution noticed on the Danube, one caused by oil and another by diesel fuel," the ministry said. "Additional analyses are under way." 
Dusan Dobricic, head of Serbia's water inspectorate, also suggested on Wednesday that there was likely a second source of the pollution in the Danube 
Reuters quoted Serbia Waters director Nikola Marjanovic as confirming there had been a minor leak at the NIS plant. "However this is a small quantity of oil which could in no way explain the size of the spill that has appeared," he said, adding that the problem had been fixed by Tuesday. 
Bulgarian authorities first spotted the oil Monday afternoon. Accounts vary, with some saying the slick is between 50km and 100km long and 300m wide, and others insisting there are two slicks, each 30km to 50km long. 
The 2,850km-long Danube, which flows through ten European countries, serves as the natural border between Bulgaria and Romania. Authorities in both countries have taken steps to contain environmental damage from the leak, which could also affect farming in the two countries. 
Bulgarian authorities will be putting up special fences at Nikopol and Belene to try to prevent contamination of the shores. Fishing has been banned and local residents have been told not to use river water. Steps also have been taken to prevent polluted waters from entering the steam generators of the Vidachim power plant and the circulation system of the Kozloduy nuclear power plant. 
Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu summoned the Serbian ambassador to discuss the situation. He expressed concern about the impact on the Danube delta, a large wildlife reserve that serves as home to hundreds of species of birds. 
After a government meeting Wednesday, Romanian Environment State Secretary Lucia Varga said authorities would act to prevent an environmental disaster. 
"We will intervene in three sections, namely, upstream of Turnu Magurele, upstream of Corabia-Islaz and upstream of Zimnicea-Giurgiu," she said. "Also, in order to limit the effects of pollution, we will install inflatable dams with absorbent materials in the areas of Turnu Magurele, Oltenita and Calarasi." 
Criticising Serbia for failing to alert its neighbours about the leak, Romania has warned it will seek damages. Bulgaria, meanwhile, has called for an international investigation. 
