24/01/2006
(New York Times, The Irish Times - 24/01/06; AFP, AP, Reuters, BBC, FT, EurActiv, EUpolitix, Turkish Press, Amnesty International - 23/01/06)
A Turkish court's decision to drop criminal charges against prominent writer Orhan Pamuk was applauded by many on Monday (23 January). But it also sparked calls for an overhaul of provisions in Turkey's new penal code to ensure greater protection of human rights. 
"This is obviously good news for Pamuk, but it's also good news for freedom of expression in Turkey," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said in a statement Monday, following the court's ruling. 
The author of "My Name Is Red", "Snow" and other novels was indicted last year over comments he made about the mass killings of Armenians during World War I and of Kurds in recent decades. 
"One million Armenians and 30,000 Kurds were killed in these lands, and nobody but me dares talk about it," Pamuk said in an interview with the Swiss newspaper Tages Anzeiger in February 2005. 
He was charged with "denigrating the Turkish national identity" under Article 301 of Turkey's new penal code, which makes it a criminal offence to "insult" the republic, parliament or other state institutions. Pamuk, 53, who has won a number of literary prizes and is widely viewed as a possible Nobel Prize contender, was facing a prison sentence of up to three years. 
The trial against him opened in an Istanbul court on 16 December. After a brief hearing, however, it was postponed until 7 February, pending the Turkish Justice Ministry's authorisation of further proceedings on the case. On Sunday, Justice Minister Cemil Cicek reportedly wrote to the court, saying he did not have jurisdiction to rule on the validity of the case. The next day, the court dropped the charges. 
Although Monday's ruling will not be binding for other cases, Rehn voiced hope that it would help ease the plight of more than a dozen other Turkish journalists, editors, writers and academics still facing similar charges. "I hope therefore that the decision on Orhan Pamuk's case will pave the way for a positive outcome for them as well, so that freedom of expression for all Turkish citizens is fully respected," said Rehn. "It is clear for me that Turkey needs to fill properly the loopholes of the current penal code, which leave too much room for abusive and restrictive interpretations, limiting freedom of expression." 
Amnesty International, which earlier slammed Turkey over the inclusion of Article 301 in the new penal code, has welcomed the court's decision. But it also voiced concern about the fate of others indicted on such grounds. 
Despite Monday's ruling, the breadth of the controversial article and its potential for arbitrary interpretation remained intact, the rights watchdog said in a statement. "In fact, Amnesty International considers that Orhan Pamuk's high profile drew attention to the deficiencies of Article 301, and now fears that the cases of other individuals prosecuted under the same article may continue in relative obscurity," it said. 
Monday's development was "too small a step on the road to freedom of expression in Turkey," Amnesty said, urging authorities to "terminate all cases pending under the article, and for the article itself to be abolished in its entirety". 
