25/09/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 25/09/06
MedOil, a London-based oil and gas exploration company, plans to search for oil in the Ionian and Adriatic Seas. An agreement signed this month by Albanian Minister of Economy, Trade and Energy Genc Ruli and Executive Director of MedOil Joseph McKniff provides for three phases of searches within seven years at a cost of 20.3m euros. 
MedOil -- which focuses mainly on exploration in Southern Europe and North Africa -- is allowed to work within the so called 'Joni-5' offshore, approximately 2,500 sq km of seafloor off southern Albania extending to the northern boundary of Greece. 
MedOil's initial obligation is for 400 sq km of a 3-D seismic work programme in the first two year period, with a minimum work expenditure of 1.6m euros. 
The agreement will be presented for ratification by the Council of Ministers, which the directors expect to take place in late October. 
Chief Executive David Thomas, commenting on the agreement with the Albanian government, said: "We are pleased to have been awarded this highly prospective offshore permit, where three hydrocarbon plays are identified in the block, all with successful analogues in the Adriatic region." 
"A number of leads and prospects have already been mapped using the existing 2-D seismic data," he added. 
The British company will carry out exploration in three stages in the Ionian Sea from the Karaburun Peninsula to the southernmost town of Saranda, and in the Durres area in the Adriatic Sea. 
"The first one will last two years, the second three years and the last one will last two more years. The contract, in cases when there are discoveries of new sources, will be 20 years. The ministry has made its research on the free exploration areas for oil, petrol and gas in the sea and Earth and now it is promoting them to the international companies," Ruli explained. 
According to experts, the restart of the exploration missions signals good prospects for the discovery of hydrocarbons. They also say that this initiative will attract more foreign companies to Albania. 
MedOil was created to acquire high-quality exploration assets on ground-floor terms. It is focused on proven hydrocarbon bearing provinces in the Mediterranean-North Africa region. 
Albania produces about 350,000 tonnes of oil annually. Petroleum was the first industry to attract direct foreign investments in Albania, after the communist economic system broke down. In 1990 and 1991, the Albanian Petroleum and Gas Directorate entered into negotiations with foreign drilling and exploration firms for onshore and offshore prospecting. 
