09/05/2011
By Muharrem Nitaj for the Southeast European Times in Pristina – 09/05/11 
According to a recently released "Freedom of the Press 2011" survey published by the US-based watchdog Freedom House, Kosovo ranks 104th out of 196 countries in press freedom, qualifying it as only "partially free". 
An Association of Professional Journalists of Kosovo poll conducted on May 3rd indicates that the government of Kosovo is one of the major violators of media freedom in the country. 
Out of 101 participating journalists in the poll, 47 described media freedom as "bad", 13 "very bad" and 38 "good". Only three said it is "very good". 
"The [absence of] the rule of law and lack of a functioning judicial system discourages journalists from reporting on high risk subjects," chairman of the association Arben Ahmeti told SETimes. 
"Kosovo is described as a transit place for drugs, and then it happened that 50kg of drugs were stolen from the police evidence room, where police keep confiscated evidence," Ahmeti said. "Threats, blackmail and other forms of pressure stopped journalists from delving deeply into the issue," he added. 
He underlines that police take note of threats against journalists, but says "Those who threaten [journalists] are never punished. Even in one case when a journalist was seriously threatened and the person who threatened her was punished, he received a fine of only 350 euros, ironic under the circumstances." 
Edward P. Joseph, the acting head of the Kosovo OSCE mission, said that the OSCE "is deeply concerned by the alleged attempts" to influence the editorial policies of the media in general, and the public broadcaster in particular. 
The government refutes the accusations and says the Freedom House report is incomplete. Government officials accused some journalists of abusing free speech by attacking the government without facts and for conducting a campaign against it. 
Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuci told SETimes the government is not perfect, but it is a guarantor of press freedom and not its violator. He said his government has demonstrated the will to guarantee media freedom. 
But not everyone agrees. "The government, political parties, and business groups are politically and financially controlling most of the media," Blerina Rogova, an analyst at the Kosovo daily Zeri, told SETimes. 
"The government has put obedient people at the head of the public media, while blackmailing private media with the finances it spends on marketing," she said. 
There is no mechanism in Kosovo where journalists can ask for help when they are threatened. There are two journalist associations, but they only morally protect the journalists. 
Four cases of threats against journalists and one case of physical mistreatment were recorded in April alone. 
