27/01/2011
(Emg.rs, The Sofia Echo - 27/01/11; European Parliament, Croatian Times, Radio.net - 26/01/11; Euobserver - 26/11/10; Balkan Chronicle - 18/11/10)
The European Parliament's (EP) Foreign Affairs Committee adopted a draft resolution on Wednesday (January 27th) saying Croatia can conclude its EU membership talks by the end of June, but voicing concern about the reigning euroscepticism in the country. 
 The document, drafted by Austrian MEP Hannes Swoboda, the assembly's rapporteur for Croatia, was approved in a 62-2 vote, with three abstentions. 
It praised Croatia for its "substantial" reform progress, citing changes to the constitution and the judiciary as examples. Noting also Zagreb's closer co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the document stressed however that it has yet to provide some important military documents requested by The Hague-based court. 
"Negotiations with Croatia can be completed in the first half of 2011 provided that the necessary reforms continue to be pursued resolutely," MEPs said. 
They listed public administration reform and the fight against corruption among areas in which the country needs to take further action within the next five months to be able to wrap up talks with Brussels. 
Corruption "seems to have been widespread in Croatia and remains a serious overall problem", an EP statement quoted the draft resolution as reading. 
It acknowledged the authorities' efforts to deal with the problem by taking steps to prosecute a former prime minister, other senior government officials and heads of state-owned enterprises suspected of involvement in graft. However, few corruption cases have gone to court and most are still stuck in the investigative stage. 
Stressing the need for transparent and fair trials, MEPs also urged Croatian authorities to ensure that corruption investigations will remain free of political interference. 
They also called for further progress in the area of refugee returns in the coming months. While public hostility towards returning Serbs has eased, Croatia must step up its efforts to help returnees acquire permanent resident status, address their housing problems and improve their social integration. 
MEPs also called on Zagreb to show full co-operation with the ICTY, a key condition for Balkan countries hoping to join the EU. 
The process of restructuring and privatising Croatia's ailing shipyards must also be sped up, if the country wants to close the negotiating chapter on competition on time, they stressed. 
But the biggest challenge Croatia faces in becoming the EU's 28th member is "selling" the benefits of accession to its citizens, according to MEPs. 
The latest Eurobarometer survey showed that only 25% of Croats believe that EU membership would be a "good thing" for the country, while nearly a third of respondents viewed it as a "bad thing" and 38% as "neither good nor bad". Given that a referendum on EU membership will have to be held before Croatia joins, MEPS urged authorities and civil society to mobilise and make citizens "feel the European project is theirs as well". 
In that Eurobarometer poll, 43% of respondents indicated they would vote against EU entry, while 38% said they would support it. 
