20/08/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb –25/07/07
Summer in Southeast Europe is a paradise for lovers of culture. Art exhibitions, concerts and film festivals have become a vital part of the season across the Balkans. Some are long-standing events seeking to regain their once-famous reputation, while others are recent additions to the cultural map. 
In Croatia, two major film festivals draw crowds at the peak of summer. The Pula Film Festival and Motovun Film Festival, named after their respective host towns on the Istrian peninsula, both screen premieres and welcome international guests as well as domestic movie stars. Pula, however, is a more traditional, mainstream-oriented event, while Motovun showcases independent moviemakers and the younger generation. 
Pula is among the oldest film festivals in Europe. Launched internationally in 1953, it soon became the main film event in the former Yugoslavia. The late Yugoslav President Josip Broz Tito was one of the festival's biggest fans, and he used his power and influence to draw major international movie stars to the Roman-era Pula Arena, where it took place. 
Even though Yugoslavia was a communist dictatorship, the Pula Festival was able to welcome the likes of Orson Welles, Sophia Loren, Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor. An open-air festival, it offered the chance to watch films under a star-filled sky. It was always enormously popular, and one of the most anticipated summer events. 
After the country disintegrated, the Pula Festival went on hiatus for nearly a decade. Starting in 1992, it was limited to hosting the Croatian Film Festival, and it was not until 2001 that it regained its international status. Today, Croatian directors still see Pula as their top test of audience support and critical appreciation. This year, the Zlatna Arena (Golden Arena) award for Best Film went to Kresimir Milic for his movie "Alive and Dead". The festival also screened the last film to be made in the former Yugoslavia, "Belle Epoque – Last Waltz in Sarajevo", completed at Zagreb's Jadran Film studios after a 17-year delay. 
The Motovun Film Festival started in 1999, and has since become a favourite among younger movie buffs from around Europe. They can camp in the nearby hills and attend movie premieres for a nominal fee. Each year, more than 50 different movies are shown during the five-day event, which some call "Croatia's Woodstock". Its top award is the "Propeller of Motovun", given this year to Israeli filmmaker Dror Shaul. 
If film festivals are a high point of Croatian summers, in Albania the emphasis is on live performance, with ancient cities and castles offering uniquely picturesque venues. Butrinti, a southwestern city dating back to the 3rd century BC, hosts an international festival in July. According to Alfred Bualoti, the event's director, in its eight years the festival has helped promote "not only the recognition and exchange of theatrical values, but also cultural tourism". 
The castle of Ali Pashe Tepelena at Porto Palermo, Himara, is expected to be transformed in an artistic laboratory open to new ideas for artists from varieties of talents and countries. 
Ali Pasha's castle at Porto Palermo, Himara, was the venue for ArtKontakt's International Festival of Art, a first-time event in Albania. The Ottoman-era fortress was transformed into an artistic laboratory for new ideas from artists of different backgrounds and nationalities. Photography, modern ballet, experimental music, performance art, and installations were among the genres featured. 
The goal is to " confess and share emotions, thoughts, opinions … we will dream and we will make a utopia reality. We will create a different world," said Andi Tepelena, one of the organisers. 
 In Macedonia, summer can feel like a continuous progression of cultural and folkloric events. The Ohrid and Skopje summer festivals are renowned. Internationally celebrated poets are drawn to the Struga Poetry Evenings. In addition, many Macedonian towns – including Strumica, Stip, Debar and Radovis – organise summer events featuring folk music, theatre and chamber concerts. 
One popular festival is Ilinden Days in Bitola. In Ohrid, the Balkans Music Square is held annually. The Antique Drama Festival takes palce at the ancient site of Stobi. 
Peter Kistermann, the renowned German multimedia artist, performed on the outdoor stage at the Prilep's Alexandria Park, as part of the annual "City of Culture" event. Bargala, an archaeological site outside Stip, hosted a theatre play for the first time this summer. More than 500 theatre lovers saw "India, India" by Petre Bakevski, directed by Mladen Krstevski. 
A high point of the summer in Macedonia was the production of "Solaris" at Ohrid's Antique Theatre on July 31st. Director Zlatko Slavenski took his inspiration from Stanislaw's famous novel by the same name, as well as from Carl Sagan's "Cosmos", lectures by Stephen Hawking and works by Dostoevsky and Shakespeare. The result was a unique fusion of video, music, dance and text. "Solaris" was performed on a stage with a diameter of 20m, featuring a 50m tower reminiscent of the Tower of Babylon.NASA photographs of the universe were shown during the production. 
Dragan Dautovski had a performance at the ancient observatory at Kokino on July 31st. He welcomed the northern solstice by playing a recently excavated, 6,000-year-old ocarina. Besides him, 20 poets and a dozen painters created a joint artwork on a large canvas. 
Serbia's most famous summer event may be the EXIT Festival, but it is hardly the only one. The Belgrade Summer Festival, held in late July and early August, keeps Serbs in touch with international trends in dance, music and theatre. The theme this year was "here and now" – as the festival's general manager, Darka Radosavljevic-Vasiljevic, explains, the phrase suggests young people's existential concerns, as well as the question of whether to stay in Serbia or go abroad. 
"Everything depends on ourselves," Radosavljevic-Vasiljevic says, and the festival sought to demonstrate this by featuring new works by the new generation of Serbian dramatists. 
 Finally, just when the festival season seems to have wrapped up, the southern city of Nis has an ace up its collective sleeve – the Nishville Jazz Festival, drawing luminaries from countries around the world. Ike Turner headlined the event this year, while legendary guitarist Larry Corvell and Vlatko Stefanovski led workshops. 
Zoran Nikolovski (Skopje), Jonilda Koci (Tirana) and Georgi Mitev Shantek (Belgrade) contributed to this report. 
