25/04/2007
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 25/04/07
Following a letter sent last week by the deputy prosecutor in Slobodan Milosevic's trial, Geoffrey Nice, a second Hague prosecutor has criticised UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte, accusing her of being "inept". 
Prosecutor Mark Attila Hoare told the Sarajevo daily Dnevni Avaz on Monday (April 23rd) that del Ponte "does not know how to make political deals". 
"Carla del Ponte is not a particularly sophisticated person. She is not up to the political games and was never particularly good at them. At one point she found herself in a situation where she did not want to be branded anti-Serb," Hoare said. 
When Serbia refused to co-operate, del Ponte agreed to deals where she made mistakes, he claimed. 
Nice's letter, sent to the daily Jutarnji List, accused del Ponte of suppressing key evidence involving Serbia and its role in the 1992-1995 conflicts. 
In it, he said del Ponte struck a secret deal with Belgrade to retain classified status for certain key documents. Unavailability of the documents, he added, was a factor in a recent International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruling that acquitted Serbia of direct responsibility for the genocide at Srebrenica. 
Del Ponte has denied the accusations, saying they stemmed from an insufficient understanding of tribunal processes. "The ICJ and ICTY are completely separate legal institutions," she told the local press. "In the legal cases at ICJ, it is the responsibility of the ICJ to establish which evidence it will examine and which documents it will request. This is not and cannot be a responsibility of ICTY or its prosecutor." 
The Bosniak member of the tripartite presidency in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Haris Silajdzic, said Nice's letter proves that the ICJ did not receive the necessary evidence. 
"Our legal team has documented that fact during the process at ICJ and categorically requested the ICJ to order Serbia to submit all of the documents from their Supreme Defence Council in Belgrade," he said. 
The UN Security Council is obliged to investigate the case and order Serbia to reveal the documents, Silajdzic said. He added, however, that the Serb presidency member, Nebojsa Radmanovic, might block BiH from making such a request to the UN. 
Radmanovic says he is ready to discuss the issue. "Somebody will have to present all possible papers," he said. "Let us open the issue at a presidency meeting and make a decision." 
The presidency's Croat member, Zeljko Komsic, says it is now up to neighbouring Croatia -- which has also filed a genocide case against Serbia -- to make sure all essential documents are brought before the ICJ. 
"Croatia must use all available mechanisms at relevant international institutions, and request all transcripts of Supreme Defence Council meetings in Belgrade, from the beginning of the conflict in Slovenia till the Dayton Peace Agreement," Komsic said. 
