16/11/2009
(Various sources -- 08/09/09 - 09/11/09)
Prosecutors in Bulgaria have launched probes against several former ministers and heads of state agencies over their alleged involvement in corruption, embezzlement or other wrongdoings. 
The highest-ranking among them is the leader of the main opposition Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) and former Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev. On November 3rd, Chief Prosecutor Boris Velchev asked parliament to lift Stanishev's immunity, so that he can be investigated in connection with a missing classified report handed to him last year. 
"Stanishev will be probed for losing documents and materials containing information which was state secret," as well as for having "due to carelessness, become the reason for the disclosure of information constituting state secret," Velchev's office said in a statement. 
The document in question was a memo prepared by the State National Security Agency (DANS) on the "actions of individual and circles exercising a destructive influence on the functioning of ministries and public administration structures". 
The scandal erupted last month when incumbent Prime Minister Boyko Borisov said that former DANS agent Alexey Petrov gave him the missing report. In line with the rules on handling classified information, Stanishev should have returned the document to a special department at the council of ministers, but failed to do so. It was unclear how Petrov, who served as advisor to former DANS head Petko Sertov, got hold of the memo. 
Shortly after, the classified report was published on the Internet. 
Claiming he had returned the report to the security agency, the former prime minister denied any wrongdoing, but said he would voluntarily give up his immunity from prosecution. According to Sofia city prosecutor Nikolay Kokinov, a person close to Stanishev, who acted as an intermediary, would also be investigated in connection with the case. 
Borisov then told the media that the total number of top secret documents his predecessor had failed to handle in line with the established procedures was 11, among them one on contraband channels and another on Russia's growing energy influence. 
The move against Stanishev prompted harsh criticism from President Georgi Parvanov, who jumped in to defend his successor as BSP leader. He said the government would sue the former prime minister over "a misplaced file," while it did nothing to catch gangland bosses. 
"Why doesn't the government act as swiftly in combating the bosses of organised crime, who have turned into one of the symbols of the Bulgarian transition," Parvanov said on November 9th. "I can't shake off the feeling that the big mafia bosses are still untouchable." 
Borisov responded immediately. He reminded the president that there were 11 missing reports, not one, that shed light on the criminal circles impeding the functioning of the state and urged him not to interfere in the prosecution's work. 
 "We follow the natural path of logic: we will catch the big sharks first and then we will go after the small fry," Sofia-based Standart daily quoted Borisov as saying. "Had we started with the bosses, we would have admitted that Bulgaria was run by the heads of organised crime and not by the [previous, BSP-led] three-way coalition. Isn't that right?" 
If Stanishev is found guilty, he could face a prison sentence of up to three years. 
Borisov's centre-right Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria party (GERB) won a landslide victory in the July 5th parliamentary elections in Bulgaria on promises to fight organised crime and corruption that have already cost the Balkan country hundreds of millions of euros in frozen EU assistance. 
During the last four months, Borisov and his ministers have revealed numerous suspicious deals concluded by members of Stanishev's cabinet, with many already referred to the state prosecutor's office. The facts brought to light thus far point to hundreds of millions of euros of budget funds having been siphoned off as a result of violating the public procurement rules, highly inflated contractual prices for construction or renovation works, or other schemes. 
Just three days after Velchev asked parliament to lift Stanishev's immunity from prosecution, the legislature received a similar request for former Labour Minister Emilia Maslarova on November 6th. 
Maslarova, also a member of the BSP, will be investigated for criminal breach of trust in connection with a contract for the repair and renovation of a social centre in the town of Stara Zagora. The deal worth nearly 10m euros was won by a company allegedly linked to the former minister's partner and was signed shortly before the end of her mandate. 
According to media reports, the price for the renovation of a single metre of space amounted to more than 1,200 euros, well above that charged for new construction. The prosecution said that Maslarova will likely be probed for the embezzlement of nearly 5m euros. 
Just like Stanishev, the former labour minister denied any wrongdoing, but asked parliament to strip her of immunity from prosecution so that investigators could do their job. 
If proven guilty, Maslarova could face a prison sentence of up to ten years and be banned from public office. 
In early September, former Agriculture Minister Valeri Tsvetanov, a representative of the Movement for Rights and Freedoms, became the first member of the previous coalition government to be indicted. He is charged with abuse of power over 15 land swap deals. 
The prosecution pressed similar charges against the former head of the State Forestry Agency Stefan Yurukov, who is said to have deliberately concluded disadvantageous deals worth nearly 2.3m euros. 
One of the first legislative moves by the Borisov government was to impose a moratorium on the notorious land swap deals, through which sponsors or others close to Bulgaria's past few governments were able to obtain state-owned plots in resort areas in exchange for much less attractive landplants in the interior of the country. 
On November 9th, the Sofia city prosecution indicted another senior official. Hristo Monov, who was dismissed as head of the Balkan country's State Railway Company (BDZ) last month, was charged over a 16.5m euro deal for the purchase of 30 second-hand carriages. 
Under the contract, the BDZ chief signed with a Swiss-based company the price for each of the 35-to-40-year-old carriages was set at 550,000 euros, while a recent expert assessment found them to be worth 217,000 euros each. The carriages, which were renovated at least nine years ago, but were not repaired, recently, do not meet the effective technical requirements, Bulgaria's English-language daily The Sofia Echo quoted prosecutors as saying. Furthermore, while Bulgaria has paid 90% of the contractual sum, only 12 of the carriages have been delivered. 
Monov intentionally signed an unfavourable deal that caused 10m euros in damages to the state coffers, prosecutors said. 
If convicted, the former BDZ head could face a jail term of up to ten years. 
