06/07/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 06/07/04
For the third year in a row, an annual US report on human trafficking has included Macedonia among the countries that are meeting basic standards for combating the international trade in people. While noting that the Macedonian government has tightened penalties and passed needed legislation, the document also warns that deficiencies in the judicial system continue to hamper progress.
According to the report, presented by US Secretary of State Colin Powell to the US Congress and President George W. Bush on 14 June, Macedonia is both a transit and destination country for trafficking victims from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. However, it is also the only Southeastern European country to be classified in Tier 1 of a three-tier system used to assess government efforts to fight trafficking.
Twenty-five countries, mainly from Western Europe, make up the first tier, which designates those countries considered to be in full compliance with the minimum standards of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act, a US law adopted in 2000.
The report cites progress made by the Macedonian government in tackling corruption, a major obstacle to anti-trafficking initiatives. "The government successfully convicted several former government officials and police officers on corruption charges and one police inspector for selling information about a planned trafficking raid," it says, noting also that several trafficking cases that went to trial during the reporting period resulted "in sentences commensurate with grave crimes". Nevertheless, the report says, judicial ineffectiveness remains a problem in Macedonia, with corruption and lack of qualifications continuing to taint the system.
Also mentioned are steps taken by the government to protect trafficking victims. Macedonian authorities have continued to operate the Transit Shelter Centre, in collaboration with the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and a local NGO. The centre has provided help to 143 victims from abroad, including several under the age of 18. Although Macedonia lacks a witness protection law, the government and IOM have provided some level of protection for victims willing to testify, the report says.
Macedonia moved to the Tier 1 list three years ago. In 2001, the country was classified as a Tier 2 country, one that "demonstrates the wish to cope with the problem but has not established international standards in that respect yet".
