08/03/2007
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 08/03/07
In lieu of full war reparations to Croatia, Montenegro could offer shares in state companies, according to local media reports. Military attacks that were launched from Montenegrin territory in 1991 wreaked havoc and destruction in the Croatian city of Dubrovnik. 
On February 27th, Montenegrin Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic, speaking after a meeting with Croatian counterpart Vladimir Seks, said the two states would agree on Montenegro's "political and moral responsibility" for the attacks. It is expected that Croatia's monetary claims will be dropped in favour of receiving shares. 
"I think we should reach a bargain which will not be so hard for us, but which will give morally and financial satisfaction to the Dubrovnik area," Krivokapic said. 
Seks' visit was the first by a Croatian parliament speaker since the conflict. 
At the time of Yugoslavia's breakup, the Montenegrin government was in a coalition with Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic. During that time, Montenegrin soldiers, as part of the Yugoslav Army, conducted an expedition to the south of Croatia, aiming to halt the country's secession from the bloc. 
Montenegro later split with Milosevic, however. In May 2006, it succeeded in restoring its statehood, ending the loose union of Serbia-Montenegro that replaced the defunct Yugoslavia. 
After independence, the new country's relations with Croatia greatly improved. The countries' prime ministers met on January 12th and discussed co-operation in economic and European integration. 
Montenegro's leaders have gone to great lengths to distance themselves from the Milosevic regime. While expressing regret for the destruction caused, they say the republic was not the decision-maker in the former Yugoslavia and thus cannot be considered the aggressor. 
Croatian leaders have been receptive. "I fully understand Krivokapic's stance that Montenegro was misused during Serbia's aggression against Croatia. She was under Milosevic's jackboot and under the influence of leaders and the Yugoslav Army General Staff," Seks said. At the same time, he stressed that compensation is important for future relations. 
However, the apologetic tone of Montenegro's pro-independence parties, which have run the republic for the last decade, has been criticised by pro-Serbian parties in Montenegro. 
The Democratic Serbian Party accused Krivokapic of defending Croatian interests, and the Serbian People's Party said they would seek the speaker's resignation. "Krivokapic obviously wants to raise new tensions and disputes between the Montenegrin citizens," the Socialist People's Party said. 
Ivo Josipovic, an international law professor who represented Croatia in its case against Serbia at the International Court of Justice, said the issue would not go way, even if Croatia entirely abandons the effort to win financial compensation. Montenegro's courts would still be obliged to prosecute individuals responsible for the war crimes, Josipovic told the BIRN news network. 
