19/07/2007
(AP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, RFE/RL, Fena - 18/07/07; Balkan Investigative Reporting Network -- 17/07/07 - 18/07/07)
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) war crimes court acquitted a senior member of wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic's government Wednesday (July 18th), citing lack of evidence. 
A former deputy interior minister and then justice minister, Momcilo Mandic is the highest-ranking former Bosnian Serb official to be indicted by local prosecutors. He was charged with four counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity for his alleged involvement in atrocities stemming from the 1992-1995 war in the Balkan country. 
Prosecutors alleged that Mandic led a Bosnian Serb attack on a police training centre in the Sarajevo suburb of Vraca in April 1992. 
They also held him responsible for the operation of all detention facilities established in the Sarajevo area and the eastern town of Foca during his tenure as justice minister between May and December 1992. He was charged in connection with the persecution, torture and killing of some 150 Bosnian Muslims there. 
 "Mandic had an ambiguous role -- he held an important position but has had no executive role," Reuters quoted Trial Chamber Chairman Davorin Jukic as saying at the end of the nine-month trial on Wednesday. "There is no evidence that he was present at the sites nor that he was supervisor to those who committed the crimes." 
More than 200 pieces of material evidence were reportedly presented during the hearings. Among the dozens of witnesses who testified during the hearings was former BiH Interior minister Alija Delimustafic. 
Mandic is the only close Karadzic associate to have been tried for war crimes by a local court to date. Welcoming Wednesday's ruling, his lawyers described the trial as "correct and objective". 
"The court has confirmed ... that we can have confidence in the independent judiciary," lawyer Refik Serdarevic was quoted as saying. 
Towards the end of the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH, Mandic left the country and settled in Belgrade. By the time of his arrest in Montenegro in August 2005 on a warrant issued by the BiH Prosecutor's Office, he was believed to be one of the richest Bosnian Serb businessmen. He had reportedly amassed his wealth from running petrol stations. 
Mandic is currently serving a nine-year prison term for abuse of office and forgery. The sentence was handed to him in October last year at the end of a separate trial against him and three others related to embezzlement at Privredna Banka Srpsko Sarajevo after the war. 
He and another former senior Bosnian Serb official, Milorad Govedarica, were ordered to return over $3m to the bank within two weeks. 
