11/11/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 11/11/05
In a set of recommendations presented on Wednesday (9 November), the EU has cautioned Montenegro not to embark on any moves towards an independence referendum until a broad consensus is reached on how it should be conducted. Otherwise, it said, the outcome will not be accepted by the international community. 
 The issue "should be dealt with in a way that preserves internal and regional stability and is compatible with the continuing progress of Serbia and Montenegro" towards membership, the EU said in a statement delivered by representatives of the bloc's "troika" -- current EU presidency holder Britain, its successor Austria, and the European Commission (EC). 
British and Austrian ambassadors David Gowan and Gerhard Jandl and the chief of the EC delegation to Serbia-Montenegro, Josep Lloveras, presented the recommendations to leaders of the Montenegrin parliamentary parties in Podgorica. 
Brussels has acknowledged that Montenegro has a right to organise a referendum on breaking away from Serbia-Montenegro, the loose state that replaced the former Yugoslavia -- or what was left of it -- in 2003. However, the EU wants the strongly pro-independence government of Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic to hash out an agreement with Montenegrin parties that oppose the move, with Serbia, and with the international community. 
It also insists that Podgorica should follow the conclusions of the Venice Commission, an EU-supported body that is drawing up rules for the referendum process. 
Ruling and opposition parties in Montenegro each put their own spin on the EU's latest message. According to Djukanovic, it represents "a response to Montenegro's invitation to all interested parties to join a dialogue about the referendum". 
He told the EU representatives that Podgorica was ready to respect "not only standards, but also the well-known European policy and accept all the suggestions from the Venice Commission, which are based on comparative practice in European countries." 
Meanwhile, the leader of the opposition Socialist People's Party, Predrag Bulatovic, welcomed the recommendations, adding that it is ready for dialogue with the international community. Montenegrin parties opposed to independence have already sent a letter to EU High Representative Javier Solana saying there is no need for the referendum, and arguing that such vote would jeopardise the state union's European prospects. 
 In Belgrade, Serbian officials took the EU's statement as supporting their call for enabling the approximately 260,000 Montenegrin citizens living in Serbia to vote in the referendum. Under current Montenegrin law, only residents can participate. Many analysts believe including the others could tip the balance against independence. 
The Venice Commission will meet in mid-December to prepare an analysis of the harmonisation of Montenegrin legislation concerning the referendum with international standards 
Meanwhile, EC delegation chief Lloveras traveled to Belgrade Thursday to present the EC progress report on Serbia-Montenegro. He emphasised that the prospects for signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement depend on the independence referendum, as well as on Serbia's co-operation with the UN tribunal and its approach towards the process of resolving Kosovo's status. 
