06/03/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 06/03/09 
Igor Cukrov, a young artist who launched his career with the help of a reality show, won Dora 2009 -- the contest that selects Croatia's Eurovision performer. A total of 16 finalists vied on February 28th for the right to represent the Balkan country in Moscow. 
The Split native's career took off after he competed on the reality TV show Operation Triumph, which airs in Croatia, Macedonia, Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The show features 16 aspiring singers who become students of the Operation Triumph Academy for three months. 
Dora 2009 took place at the Hotel Kvarner in Opatija. The winning entry, "Beautiful Tena" is a duet -- professional singer Andreja Susnjara performs the refrain with Cukrov. "I promise that I will make Croatia happy in Russia," Cukrov said after winning. He and Susnjara will take the stage on May 14th in Moscow. 
Croatian hit-maker Tonci Huljic, an influential figure in Balkan show business, composed "Beautiful Tena", with his wife, Vjekoslava, supplying the lyrics. Huljic has written four of the songs that Croatians have performed at Eurovision, including "Marija Magdalena", which Doris Dragovic sang at the 1999 Eurovision. She finished fourth -- tying Maja Blagdan (1996, "Sveta Ljubav") for Croatia's best result to date at Eurovision. 
Last year, though, Kraljevi Ulice & 75 Cents placed 21st -- the worst finish ever for Croatia. After that fiasco, some thought the country should sit out the contest for a year. 
Croatia has been participating in Eurovision as an independent nation since 1993, when the female vocal group Putokazi represented it with "Don't Ever Cry". 
In 1989, a Zadar-based Croatian band won Eurovision, but it was representing Yugoslavia. Riva's song was "Rock Me". 
Eleven-year-old Croatian Dino Jelusic had more success than his post-independence elders. He won the first edition of the Junior Eurovision Song Contest in 2003 with his rendition of "You Are My One and Only". 
