12/07/2007
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 12/07/07
The massacre of thousands of Bosniaks at Srebrenica 12 years ago was commemorated at the Potocari Memorial Centre on Wednesday (July 12th). Following the ceremony, 465 victims identified over the past year were buried. 
In February, the International Court of Justice ruled that Bosnian Serb forces committed genocide after they overran Srebenica in July 1995, rounding up as many as 8,000 men and boys and taking them off to be executed. The court ruled that Serbia first failed to prevent, and then failed to punish and extradite, the persons responsible -- including former Bosnian Serb General Ratko Mladic. 
Wednesday's commemoration, attended by 30,000 people, took place in an atmosphere of dignity, and without incident. The gathering was secured by more than 1,000 Republika Srpska (RS) police officers in co-operation with the State Agency for Investigation and Protection, the European police mission, and other security agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte paid her respect to the Srebrenica victims and vowed that the perpetrators will face justice before her mandate expires. In an expression of dissatisfaction with her work, however, the Srebrenica Mothers' Association boycotted del Ponte's appearance. 
Haris Silajdzic, a member of the state presidency, said in his speech that he wished to see BiH become a state that is good for all people who live there. "The world will help us build such a BiH, and will make sure crime is not rewarded. That is how we will pay our dues to these innocent victims," Silajdzic said. 
So far, 2,907 victims have been buried at the Memorial Centre. Another 1,000 have been exhumed, but not yet identified. The Research and Documentation Centre, a Sarajevo-based NGO that has been collecting data on wartime atrocities, said in a recent report that at least 6,886 people were killed at Srebrenica. 
The day before the massacre anniversary, BiH High Representative Miroslav Lajcak imposed five legal changes, designed to make war crimes processing easier. He also ordered IDs and passports to be taken away from 93 persons who are under investigation. 
"We have strong reasons to believe that some of these persons have been involved in the network for supporting those indicted with war crimes. Thirty-five out of these 93 persons are employees of the RS police, which has suspended them from their duties," Lajcak said. 
At the request of the UN war crimes tribunal, Lajcak removed former RS Police Director Dragomir Andan from the post of police director assistant for training. He said the move was meant to stop Andan from using his position to help networks that support war crimes indictees. 
In response, Andan said he has been deprived of his human rights. He called on the authorities to lock him up until the investigation is complete because he cannot earn a living anymore. RS authorities expressed their regrets that the high representative decided to use his wide-ranging Bonn Powers so soon after starting his mandate. 
