22/10/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 22/10/08
As the 2009 local elections approach, more and more business tycoons are calculating whether to enter politics and how to win votes. So far, two wealthy candidates have openly announced their political ambitions. 
Split-based supermarket-chain owner Zeljko Kerum will be an independent candidate for Split mayor, while tobacco magnate Plinio Cuccurin hopes to conquer the political scene in Istria. 
Until now, most businessmen avoided the limelight. They usually chose not to align themselves with a party or become too attached to a particular leader or candidate. Among the country's longtime politicians, only three have come from the business sector: Croatian Peoples' Party leader Radmir Cacic; parliamentary deputy Stipe Gabric Jambo; and former economy minister Goranko Fizulic, owner of the Turbo Limach chain of children's stores. 
Now things are rapidly changing. With Kerum and Cuccurin throwing their hats into the ring, other notable businessmen are likely to follow. According to the Croatian weekly Globus, Agrokor CEO Ivica Todoric is mulling a presidential run in 2010. Considered the richest man in Croatia, he runs a corporate empire that boasts more than 30,000 employees. 
Should Todoric run, he might face competition from Jure Radic, a close associate of the late President Franjo Tudjman. Radic now heads the largest construction and engineering company in Croatia, IGH. 
Yet another potential candidate is Nadan Vidosevic, president of the Croatian Chamber of Commerce. Like Radic and Todoric, he is on the right side of the political spectrum. 
Not all welcome the emerging trend. According to Inga Tomic Koludrovic, head of the Croatian Sociological Association, the move by businessmen to enter the political arena is not a wise one. 
"This will not bring anything good to society," Koludrovic told Globus. "These two parts of society should be divided, not united. Businesses want to gain profits, while politics should work for the public welfare." 
Candidates from the business sector have a different take, however. They argue that their expertise and connections will help them secure economic benefits for their constituents. In a market economy, they ask, who is better equipped to represent the interests of Croatians? In 2009, it will be up to voters to answer that question. 
