01/11/2005
(Ziua - 01/11/05; AP, Dow Jones, Rompres, Mediafax, Reporter.gr - 31/10/05)
Having failed to reach an agreement with the Romanian government on its economic programme for 2006, the IMF indicated on Monday (31 October) that its current standby arrangement with Bucharest would be terminated. 
"I will report to the IMF directors that the IMF programme with Romania is now off track," Emanule Van der Mensbrugghe, the Fund's mission chief for Romania, said at the end of two weeks of talks with Romanian officials. 
The IMF approved a 24-month standby arrangement for about $367m for Romania in July 2004, aimed at consolidating the country's previous achievements and preparing the economy for a smooth and trouble-free accession to the EU, planned for 2007. 
Upon approval of the agreement last year, the IMF listed "a reduction in the general government budget deficit, a strengthening of the finances of state-owned enterprises through energy price adjustments and wage restraint" as some of the key stabilisation policies Romania was expected to follow. It also recommended measures to contain credit growth and adjustments to enhance efficiency in the areas of fiscal revenue and expenditure. 
Van der Mensbrugghe voiced concern Monday that the fiscal and monetary policies currently in place and envisioned for next year may affect Romania's macroeconomic stability. 
"With the current policy stance, Romania risks entering the EU with its competitiveness weakened, growing macroeconomic imbalances, deteriorating education and health services, and important gaps in physical infrastructure," the IMF official said. 
According to a Fund statement, quoted by the Romanian news agency Mediafax, the introduction in January of a flat 16 per cent income tax, which replaced a 25 per cent business income tax and a progressive 18 per cent to 40 per cent personal income tax, has led to a revenue loss of about 1.5 per cent of GDP. At the same time, public sector salaries have gone up around 50 per cent. Both trends are contributing to inflationary pressures, the IMF says. 
"If annual inflation remains at 8 per cent to 9 per cent, while inflation in the EU (countries) is 2-2.5 per cent, the Romanian economy will become less and less competitive," Van der Mensbrugghe said. 
The IMF also views as unrealistic the government's plans to reduce the budget deficit to about 0.5 per cent of GDP in 2006, from an estimated nearly 1 per cent this year. Authorities should consider spending less on salaries and more on items such as infrastructure, goods and services, the Fund said. 
The government has rejected the IMF's conditions as "unacceptable", with Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu insisting the priority is to develop infrastructure. 
An effective arrangement with the IMF is not a requirement for a country's EU entry. However, the European Commission has made it clear that "a stable macroeconomic framework is an essential indicator of a country's degree of preparedness for membership and the status of the country's agreements with the IMF may offer valuable information in this respect". 
