25/05/2005
(FT, International Herald Tribune - 25/05/05; AFP, AKI, Deutsche Welle, Turkish Press, Turks.us, Zaman - 24/05/05; AFP, FT - 23/05/05) 
Turkish Economy Minister Ali Babacan was appointed Tuesday (24 May) as his country's top negotiator with the EU. Turkey begins its membership talks with the Union on 3 October, but is not expected to join the bloc before 2015. 
"I believe with his youth and dynamism, [Babacan] will be successful," Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said during a regular weekly meeting of his Justice and Development Party. At 38, Babacan is the youngest member of Erdogan's cabinet. An Ankara-born technocrat, he has won respect for securing billions of dollars in IMF loans to underpin market reforms that have helped steer the country out of its 2001 financial crisis. 
Babacan majored in industrial engineering at the Middle East Technical University in Ankara, graduating at the top of his class. He then obtained a postgraduate degree in business management in the United States and worked for some time as a financial consultant there, returning to Turkey in 1994. 
He is expected to continue in his current cabinet post after the EU-Turkey negotiations begin. 
''I am happy that Prime Minister Erdogan chose me for the position of chief negotiator," Babacan remarked Tuesday. "There is a long way ahead of us. By working and standing together, we know that an excellent future will be reached.'' 
Acknowledging that the negotiating process would not be easy, he said it would mark the start of a period of transformation for his country. "If the majority of our society is committed to the target [joining the EU] and works for it, I hope the result will be full membership," the minister told reporters. 
Analysts had considered Babacan a likely candidate for the post of chief negotiator, given his experience during often-difficult negotiations with the IMF and the fact that economic issues will likely pose one of the greatest challenges during talks with Brussels. 
"I think he's the best possible appointment," London's Financial Times quoted Metin Ar of the Istanbul-based firm Garanti Securities as saying. "He has a wonderful command of English, great interpersonal skills and an IQ close to Einstein's." 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul also welcomed the appointment. "The issues that Babacan deals with are the ones related to the EU," Gul said in Sweden, where he is attending a two-day NATO meeting. "He will handle them successfully." 
