18/07/2006
(AP, Reuters, FT, The Times, BBC, TerraNet, Bucharest Daily News, Nine o'clock - 18/07/06; CNN, AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, BBC, CNA, Rompres, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik, HINA - 17/07/06)
Nearly a week after the escalation of violence in the Middle East, the evacuation of foreigners from Lebanon picked up speed Monday (17 July), as governments stepped up their efforts to move their citizens to safety. 
According to sources in Damascus, about 75,000 foreigners crossed into Syria during the first five days of fighting in Lebanon.
On Monday, 283 Romanian nationals, including 107 children, crossed the Lebanese-Syrian border and were scheduled to arrive in Bucharest in the evening aboard three Tarom airplanes. They join about 340 others who had already left the country. 
In all, about 1,000 Romanians had been living in Lebanon. Plans for evacuating the remainder are being considered, Romanian presidency spokeswoman Adriana Saftoiu said after a meeting chaired by President Traian Basescu, the second in as many days. 
"If the repatriation of other Romanians appears necessary, we are prepared to repeat the operation, while taking into account the developments in hostilities and the available infrastructure," Romanian Foreign Minister Mihai-Razvan Ungureanu said. 
Using the land route via Syria and the assistance of the German embassy in Beirut, Croatia was able to evacuate 39 employees of the Croatian company Djuro Djakovic on Monday. After their arrival in Damascus, the workers would be flown to Croatia on a charter plane, a Croatian Foreign Ministry official said.
According to the BBC, 50 Greeks already have arrived in Athens, having travelled via Damascus. Thirty-two Turks have crossed the Turkish-Syrian border by bus. 
Bulgaria, which has some 500 nationals living in Lebanon, initially planned to use the land route via Syria for the evacuation of its citizens. But the foreign ministry indicated on Monday that it had abandoned this idea and was now making arrangements for evacuation by sea, via Cyprus. 
Of the up to 350 Bulgarian citizens still trapped in Lebanon, 200 have contacted the Bulgarian embassy in Beirut. According to Deputy Foreign Minister Feim Chaushev, they were being taken out of the country on the 1,300-passenger Greek ferry, the Ierapetra, chartered by France, which was scheduled to dock at the Cypriot port of Larnaca Tuesday morning. More evacuees will be ferried to Cyprus on Wednesday and Friday. 
Cypriot Foreign Ministry Permanent Secretary Sotos Zakheos told a press conference in Nicosia on Monday that a total of 100 Cypriots would return home aboard a Greek frigate evacuating Greek nationals from Lebanon. 
Cyprus offered on Sunday to help in evacuation efforts. 
"Cyprus is prepared to assist every foreign citizen trapped in Lebanon," said Cypriot government spokesman Christodoulos Pashiardis. "We will provide every possible [means of] assistance and all necessary accommodation to assist all European citizens and other nationals." 
 Hundreds of foreigners -- including tourists and dual nationals -- have been moved to safety through the Mediterranean. Many more are expected to be evacuated along this route in the coming days. 
Canada has 40,000 nationals in Lebanon, while the United States and Australia each have 25,000. 
