16/12/2010
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 16/12/10
Macedonia finished its long-standing negotiations with the IMF by becoming the first member state to obtain a new financial instrument -- a precautionary credit line. 
The instrument was established earlier this year for IMF members that have sound economic fundamentals and policies and do not presently have a financial need but face risks that may give rise to such needs. For Macedonia, it is a two-year arrangement, during which the country can access 400m euros in the first year and 80m euros in the second. 
IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn said he was very pleased by the positive response to the invitation he extended to bolster international confidence. 
 "Macedonia has a sustained track record of sound economic policies. Its economic fundamentals and policy framework are strong, and the Macedonian authorities have demonstrated a commitment to maintaining this solid record," Strauss-Khan said. 
 IMF Mission Director to Macedonia Wes MacGrew added that if the government continues on the current path, it may not need to utilise the funds. 
Nevertheless, he said it is especially important now, given risks coming from other countries, that Macedonia has insurance. 
 Finance Minister Zoran Stavrevski explained the credit line will be used only if the country needs funds and can't obtain them any other way. 
"The fact that Macedonia is the first state in the world for which the IMF approved this credit line ... confirms that the Fund believes Macedonia will hold the same level of quality and healthy economic policies in the future," he said. 
The credit line will be based on the government's economic forecasts. 
Stavrevski confirmed the country's fiscal deficit next year is estimated to be 2.5% of GDP, and that the government is committed to the policies that support the country's foreign currency regime. 
State Bank Governor Petar Goshev explained that the new credit line is equivalent to announcing to foreign investors and creditors that Macedonia has yet another pillar of support as insurance against possible risks from economically troubled countries abroad. 
Macedonia's Financial Officers Association member Elena Nikolovska told SETimes that unlike other IMF arrangements or credits, this financial instrument has no strings attached; Skopje can use the funds when it deems necessary to cover any budgetary needs. 
 Nikolovska said the government has made a huge effort to normalise the economic situation in the past two years and the country needs exactly these positive relations with the IMF -- and the World Bank -- to provide additional assurance of its macroeconomic and financial stability and fiscal discipline. 
"It is a signal to all financial and non-financial organisations that Macedonia is secure," Nikolovska said. 
