15/12/2005
(The Scotsman - 15/12/05; AP, AFP, DPA, Deutsche Welle, International Herald Tribune, AND Kronos International, SEE Security Monitor, Office of the High Representative -14/12/05)
Christian Schwarz-Schilling, a former German postal service minister and an expert on the Balkans, was appointed on Wednesday (14 December) as the international community's next High Representative (HR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). He will assume his new job on 31 January, replacing Britain's Paddy Ashdown in the post. 
Schwarz-Schilling's appointment was announced after an extraordinary session of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) to mark the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Accords (DPA). Wednesday's meeting in Paris brought together representatives of international organisations and about 15 countries, including DPA guarantor states Britain, France, Germany, Russia and the United States. Presidency Chairman Ivo Miro Jovic, Prime Minister Adnan Terzic and Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic represented the BiH authorities. 
"The Steering Board looks forward to working with Schwarz-Schilling," thepanel said in a statement. It praised Ashdown for his contributions to implementation of sweeping reforms during his more than three-year tenure as HR. 
Schwarz-Schilling, 75, served as telecommunications and postal service minister from 1982 to 1992, when he resigned from then Chancellor Helmut Kohl's government, in protest over its failure to intervene in the unfolding conflict in BiH. In 1995, he became the international mediator for BiH and has since made numerous visits to the country. Described as an impartial arbitrator, he is said to have won broad respect among the BiH's three main ethnic communities -- the Bosnian Muslims, Croats and Serbs. In October this year, then German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder nominated him as Ashdown's successor. 
Several Bosnian politicians welcomed his appointment Wednesday. 
"Schwarz-Schilling has sensibility for every BiH citizen, for the displaced persons and post-war difficulties," said Party for BiH leader Safet Halilovic. "I think such a person will be able to successfully take BiH from the Dayton to the Brussels phase." 
In a communique following Wednesday's meeting, the PIC's Steering Board said that much had been achieved in BiH over the past ten years, but "much remains to be done." It also outlined a list of 11 priorities the country should focus on in order to overcome lingering inter-ethnic problems. 
Modernising the Dayton constitution; transferring all war crimes indictees, including former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military chief, Ratko Mladic, to the UN tribunal in The Hague; and maintaining the refugee returns process top the list of goals. The other eight priorities listed in the communiqué include full implementation of police and defence reforms, completing the unification of Mostar, accelerating economic reforms and strengthening civil society. 
"The people of Bosnia and Herzegovina have done much to bind up the wounds of the war that engulfed them," the Steering Board said. "They have shown fortitude and patience, ingenuity and a capacity to forgive. They have won the battle of the last ten years. It is now up to their leaders to guide their country into a new phase." 
