22/08/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia – 22/08/11
Amid economic crisis and burdensome austerity measures in the Balkans, Bulgaria's 'flat tax' has created an opportunity for businesses to set up shop at a low cost. A flat tax is a system under which taxpayers pay a single tax rate at the same percentage of their total income or profit. 
Currently, there are over 2,000 Greek and nearly 300 Romanian companies that have registered in Bulgaria, according to official statistics. Bulgaria's National Revenue Agency (NRA) reports that since 2006, the number of wholly Greek-owned businesses that filed taxes in Bulgaria has grown almost threefold. 
The number of companies climbed from 733 in 2006 to 2,074 by the end of 2010, with the sharpest increase occurring in 2008 -- from 619 to 1,168 -- when Bulgaria introduced its 10% flat corporate and personal income tax. Since then, business operations in Bulgaria have increased annually by an average of 600 companies. 
The figures for Romanian businesses show a similar trend. From only 33 registered companies in 2006, the number of wholly Romanian-owned businesses in Bulgaria reached 272 in 2010. 
The data suggest that a lower tax rate has also driven neighbouring companies to Bulgaria. Comparatively, corporate taxes in Greece stand at 24% -- more than double that of its neighbour. 
One factor contributing to business flight is the Greek government's implementation of austerity measures amid the most serious financial and economic crisis in the country's history. 
 Theofilos Aslanidis, general manager of the Thessaloniki-based Hellenic Fashion Industry Association, contends that the migration of Greek businesses to neighbouring Bulgaria is "nothing new", but rather a phenomenon dating back to the 1990s. 
According to Aslanidis, "Whoever could have transferred their business to Bulgaria has already done so; they didn't wait for this crisis." Bulgaria's cheap labour costs are another attraction to businesses. According to EU statistics, Greece has one of the highest wage levels, while Bulgaria stands firmly at the bottom. 
Aslanidis praises Bulgaria's cheap labour costs, saying that "Greek companies have strengthened their operations in the retail sector as a result." He also applauds the low level of red tape in Bulgaria's customs sectors. 
Lower transportation costs, inexpensive property rents, and a stable economic situation in Bulgaria are among the factors attracting foreign companies. 
Romanian businesses are also tempted to increase their presence in Bulgaria, especially after the Romanian government introduced fiscal reform to increase taxes and tighten regulation. This was in response to international financial institution requirements attached to the 20 billion-euro loan that helped the country stave off economic disaster in part by implementing strict austerity measures. 
 In Romania, the corporate income tax stands at 16%. However, authorities re-established a 3% rate for microenterprises that meet certain criteria, such as having less than nine employees and a turnover of less than 100,000 euros. 
The country "is so bureaucratically and fiscally excessive that Romanian companies seek friendlier environments in Bulgaria -- a close destination for businesses based in southeast Romania," Editor Aurel Dragan of CAPITAL, the Romanian economic weekly. 
Low tax rates have also had the broader effect of attracting private citizens to the country. The NRA in Rousse recently announced that the city's richest person is a Romanian consultant who earned 3.12m leva (around 1.6m euros) last year. 
This individual, whose name was not revealed, owed 187,000 leva in taxes (95,000 euros) as of last May, according to the office. 
 Apart from the companies who are registered in Bulgaria, there are also those who outsource some of their activities. According to Jechko Dimitrov, president of the Bulgarian Institute for Foreign Trade, their number is much higher than those that register. Many believe this is good for the country, as it creates a living for people in certain areas. But Dimitrov disagrees, based on the general economic picture. 
 "They [the outsourcing businesses] return all their profits abroad ... This is not good for Bulgaria. We should try to attract investors and make them move their whole business to Bulgaria," he told SETimes. "They come here because our labour is cheaper. That's the only use they have." 
According to him, the mechanism of lower taxes does not work. If it did, he argues, "we would have seen much more big investors moving their headquarters and financial balances to Bulgaria." 
 "It turns out it is not the nominal value of taxes that matters, but the overall price of doing business in Bulgaria," he said. "If you don't have good transport infrastructure, if you have problems with bureaucracy and corruption, business turns out to be more expensive. What use will you have from paying lower taxes then?" 
"Attracting small traders in small villages in towns cannot be a policy to develop a region and the overall economy," Dimitrov concluded. 
