01/10/2012
By Linda Karadaku for the Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 01/10/12
Kosovo will create its first state reserve this year, which will be solely comprised of wheat stores. The government has already announced a tender for wheat in the amount of 1,000 tonnes, but experts argued not having other reserves exposes Kosovo to the danger of natural disasters and economic blockades from exporting countries. 
"The state reserve will have only wheat this year, which is a priority and a strategic product," Arta Istrefi, a senior adviser in the ministry of trade and industry, told SETimes. 
Istrefi explained that the limited budget does not allow for other commodities or products, but the 2013 budget forecast provides for additional wheat, oil and oil products for the state reserve. 
Adil Behramaj, spokesperson for the ministry of agriculture, told SETimes that wheat production in the country is estimated to be 300,000 tonnes. Kosovo imports 130,000 tonnes to meet the demand of 205kg per person annually. 
Kosovo approved the Law on State Reserves in 2010 and established a corresponding department in 2011. 
According to Musa Limani, professor at the AAB University in Pristina, "State reserves are especially important because Kosovo still faces challenges, such as the lack of local production, and imports 80 percent of the main food products, which impact inflation and create disorder in the domestic market," Limani told SETimes. 
Limani said Kosovo should be concerned about not having state reserves beyond wheat this year, given the potential for natural calamities or product blockades from Serbia or Macedonia, the main countries from which Kosovo imports. 
"Last year, the winter was very harsh and over 30 villages were inaccessible while lacking main food products. The Kosovo government could not offer aid because it was lacking state reserves," Limani said. 
Elsewhere in the region, state reserves have proven essential to compensate for the severe weather imbalances that destroyed most of the crop this year. 
Serbia sold 5 million liters of cooking oil and 5,000 tonnes of sugar from its state reserves to prevent shortages following a disastrous harvest caused by this year's drought. Similarly, Macedonia aided farmers by providing fodder from its state reserves. 
Last February, Albania declared a state of emergency during an unusually harsh winter and used state reserves to feed hundreds of families among the 230,000 affected people in the northern part of the country. 
Because Kosovo produces little, creating state reserves is indispensable to create stability in the markets, argued Nora Istrafi, an analyst for the GAP institute in Pristina. 
"The dependence of the Kosovo economy on importing goods in general, but especially on importing strategic goods, makes this issue even more important," Istrefi told SETimes. 
Agim Shahini, chairman of the Kosovo Alliance of Businesses, is worried that the lack of products in extraordinary situations will undermine the economy. 
"The citizens would feel this lack, and the basic products would become more expensive," Shahini told SETimes. 
