22/03/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 22/03/05
The trial of four Serb paramilitaries believed to have been involved in the abduction, torture and slaying of 17 Muslims from the border town of Sjeverin in October 1992 has been widely viewed as a test case for the Serbian judiciary, at a time when Belgrade is hoping to persuade the International Crimnal Tribunal for Yugoslavia (ICTY) to transfer cases to local courts. 
The original September 2003 verdict was one of the first to have been issued in a war crimes case by a domestic court in Serbia. Milan Lukic, Oliver Krsmanovic and Dragutin Dragicevic were sentenced to 20 years in prison for their role in the slaughter, while Djorde Sevic received a 15-year sentence. 
A year later, however, the Serbian Supreme Court decided to over-rule the verdict, and a retrial is under way at Belgrade's Regional Court. In announcing its decision, the Supreme Court judges cited procedural irregularities. But human rights organisations and victims' advocates are crying foul. 
Jovan Nicic of the Humanitarian Law Centre believes there are "political motivations" behind the Court's decision in the Sjeverin case, as well as another case involving the murder of 19 ethnic Albanians in Podujevo, Kosovo in March 1999. "In the Sjeverin case, the judges date back to the Milosevic era and the presiding judge is a Serb from Kosovo," his organisation quoted Nicic as saying. 
Dragoljub Todorovic, the lawyer representing the victims and their families, also attributes the ruling to political rather than legal considerations. "Since the assassination of Prime Minister [Zoran] Djindjic, Serbia is being ruled by an anti-Hague lobby," Todorovic says, suggesting that the government is seeking to deflect blame from those who bore command responsibility for the atrocities. 
The four defendants, as well as five accomplices whose identities remain unknown, were members of a paramilitary group known as the "Avengers". On 22 October 1992, at the border town of Mioce, they halted a bus running between Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), checking the identities of the passengers. Seventeen Muslims were taken off and then transported to Visegrad in BiH, where they were physically abused and then summarily executed on the banks of the Drina River. 
According to testimony by the defendants and several witnesses, the militia's commanding superior was Yugoslav Army Lieutenant Colonel Luka Dragicevic, chief-of-staff of the second light infantry Podrinje brigade at the time of the killings. Dragicevic, however, has not been charged, nor has an investigation been launched into his role. 
Two of the defendants, ICTY indictees Lukic and Krsmanovic, are currently in hiding, with warrants out for their arrest and detention. 
"It is in the interest of the state and the families of the kidnapped for the full truth about this crime to be revealed," says Dzemil Halilagic, president of the Human Rights Council of Priboj. "Once the trial is concluded, conditions will be met for initiating a legal procedure for compensation. The victims' families stand to lose the most from prolonging the trial." 
