07/06/2011
(Euobserver - 07/06/11; Europa, Hungarian EU Presidency, DPA, Wall Street Journal, Daily.tportal.hr, Reuters - 06/06/11; EurActiv - 03/06/11)
The chapter on fisheries in Croatia's accession talks with the EU was provisionally closed during a meeting in Brussels on Monday (June 6th), bringing the Balkan nation a step closer to the successful conclusion of its membership negotiations with the Union. 
 "Fisheries is a core chapter in the accession negotiations and highly significant because the Union has exclusive competence in the area of the conservation of marine biological resources under the common fisheries policy, as well as for the conclusion of international agreements in that area," the EU said in a statement. 
Ambassador Peter Gyorkos, Hungary's permanent representative in Brussels, who chaired Monday's meeting, described the agreement reached during the 15-month discussions on the fisheries policy as "perfectly balanced". 
It will, inter alia, allow Croatia to temporarily keep its traditional fisheries technology in some areas, giving it time to complete the preparations for bringing it in line with the relevant EU standards, according to a statement by the Hungarian presidency of the 27-nation bloc. 
The EU noted, however, that it will be monitoring Croatia's fulfillment of the obligations it has taken up during the talks on the fisheries chapter. It also urged the Balkan country "to continue to fully respect its commitment not to apply any aspect of the Croatian Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone to the EU member states until a common agreement in the EU spirit is found". 
Croatia's Chief Negotiator Vladimir Drobnjak said Zagreb was content with the agreement reached with Brussels on that policy area. 
 "I think that all of our vital interests at the Adriatic, interests of the Croatian fisheries sector and fishermen are fully protected," he said, adding that the end of the membership negotiations with the Union was now in sight. 
"We are very close to the finishing line," Drobnjak said after Monday's meeting. "I'm certain this is not the last chapter we are closing this month." 
 Launched in October 2005, Croatia's talks with the EU were broken into 35 policy areas, or chapters. The country now needs to close only four of them before wrapping up its negotiations with Brussels. They include the chapters on competition policy, judiciary and fundamental rights, and financial and budgetary provisions, as well as one on "other issues" that is usually automatically opened and closed at the end of the talks. 
Hungary, which made the conclusion of Croatia's talks one of the priorities of its rotating six-month EU presidency, ending on June 30th, said on Monday that the European Commission (EC) is to release its evaluation on the remaining four chapters in a few days. 
"Should this evaluation be positive, the Hungarian Presidency will do its utmost to close the negotiations before the end of the presidency's term," Gyorkos said. 
Aside from the chapter on "other issues", the other three are considered as some of the most difficult in the talks, especially those on competition policy and on the judiciary and fundamental rights. 
Concerning the chapter on competition, "the privatisation of state-owned ship factories must be brought in harmony with the EU regulations on state aid," the Union said. In the area of the judiciary, achievements "must be demonstrated through several performance-measurement benchmarks," it added. 
According to Euobserver, the provisional closure of the final chapters in Zagreb's talks is likely to be announced during an intergovernmental conference in the Belgian capital or in Luxembourg on June 21st, ahead of the two-day EU summit opening on June 23rd. 
During that meeting in Brussels, the leaders of the 27 member states could then set mid-2013 as a provisional date for Croatia's entry in the bloc. 
