23/04/2012
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 23/04/12
Jobless rates are high largely around the world but youth unemployment in the Balkans is almost four times the EU average. In most of the countries, the education system and a lack of work programmes are deemed the main culprits. 
In Bosnia and Herzegovina for example, the National Statistics Bureau says that in 2011, fully 55% of people between the ages of 15 and 30 were unemployed. In Macedonia, the State Statistical Office says 52.5% of those between 15 and 24 were jobless. More of the same is found in Greece, where the unemployment rate for those under 25 is 51.5%. It's roughly 50% in Serbia. 
There, the National Unemployment Service is working to put people to work by offering subsidies to those willing to start their own businesses. 
Aleksandar Cvetic, 31, of Pancevo, decided to give it a try. Today, Cvetic has a company called Elecktrosakupljac that recycles unwanted electronics, such as computers and refrigerators. 
"I saw my opportunity when the government announced subsidies for collection of [electronic] waste. At the beginning, that decision wasn't implemented in practice, so I started with some losses and expenses. But once the subsidies came, we started working full time and today I have four employees," Cvetic told SETimes. 
Young entrepreneurs like him are offered 160,000 RSD in conditional grants. "Thanks to this project, 3,725 people have started their own businesses. Of this number, 25-35% of subsidy users are under 30," Dejan Jovanovic, director of the National Unemployment Service, told SETimes. 
But entrepreneurship is not for everyone. In fact, a study conducted by various civic initiatives earlier this year found that most young people in Serbia are afraid to start their own business, saying it is expensive, complicated and essentially a gamble: they feel the state does not encourage younger workers enough. 
Branko Jovic, 29, a graphic designer from Sabac, has been registered with the National Unemployment Service since December 2009. For more than two years, he has applied for jobs in his field, yet has never been offered one. 
"I was thinking about opening my own studio, but I realised it is better to do freelance work. It is too risky, since we have a huge market for graphic design and the competition is too harsh, especially if you start your own business," Jovic told SETimes. 
According to Kosta Andric, director of the Belgrade Youth Office, education is a chief reason for the high unemployment rates among young people. 
"Job requirements are different than those in the past, while the educational system is still rigid and old-fashioned. It is not enough to prepare students for their careers. They should be taught how to adapt to the changing global and entrepreneurial environment", Andric told SETimes. 
There is also a lack of resources for jobs training. In BiH for example, less than 1 convertible mark (0.5 euro) per unemployed person is allocated for employment programmes. 
"Last year, the state set aside 78m KM (39m euros) from the budget for agriculture, and only 200,000 KM (100,000 euros) for youth programmes. This shows how much the state cares about its youth," Rusmir Probic, project co-ordinator for the Institute for Youth development wrote in an article published in Aljazeera. 
According to data supplied by the National Statistic Office, 55% of young people in BiH are not interested in starting a business, while 30% say they are discouraged from starting any business of their own. 
In Bulgaria, the Statistics Institute estimated there were 28.9% of young people under 24 who were unemployed at the end of 2011. 
The main priority of the country's 2012 Action Plan on Employment is to target joblessness among those 29 and below. The plan consists of measures, programmes and activities that would boost the professional qualifications of young workers by offering training in practical skills and offering opportunities for internships. 
In Montenegro too, youth unemployment is considered one of the most important social problems, although the unemployed rate among the young is relatively low at 11%. 
The director of the Youth Initiative for Human rights in Montenegro, Boris Raonic, said there are too many young people unable to exercise one of their basic rights -- the right to work. 
"Many find the only solution in a grey economy, where they don't have any kind of state protection," Raonic told SETimes. 
He added that the educational system in Montenegro has failed since it produces professions like diplomats, lawyers and managers while there is virtually no possibility for them to get adequate jobs in those fields. 
According to the Croatian Employment Bureau, every third jobless person was under the age of 30 at the end of last year. 
Unemployment is driving young people to leave home in search of brighter prospects abroad. In Serbia for example, 63% of university students say they would like to leave the country, which ranks it second in the world in "brain drain", according to the US Agency for International Development (USAID). 
In Kosovo, more than half of the young want to emigrate, according to the UNDP. In a separate study conducted in part by the EU delegation in BiH, it was determined that since the end of war, more than 100,000 young people have left the country. Of those who remain, 73% say they would leave right away. 
Stefan Erdoglija, 26, a philosophy graduate from Belgrade, agrees with them. “I can’t wait to leave this country for good. I am currently applying for several MA studies abroad because that’s the best chance for me to leave the country and stay abroad,” Erdoglija told SETimes. 
