22/12/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times - 22/12/08
For Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Catholics, Christmas is certainly the high point of the winter season. The Stup district of Sarajevo, populated largely by ethnic Croats, is decorated lavishly each year. The main Christmas Mass occurs in the Sarajevo Cathedral, a beautiful old building in Romano-Gothic style dating back to 1889. 
It is one of the most recognisable structures in downtown Sarajevo. Likewise, the Mass held there each year is a major event for the entire city, regardless of faith. On Christmas Eve, the building is packed to capacity not only with Catholics but with Muslims, Orthodox Christians and even atheists. It has become a matter of prestige to be seen there. Many, in fact, end up waiting outside the building because there is no room inside. 
In rural areas, meanwhile, Catholics observe some very old traditions and rites. Preparations start as early as December 13th, St. Lucia's day, with the planting of the traditional Christmas wheat. It will be trimmed on Christmas Eve, decorated with candles and a red or blue ribbon, and placed under the Christmas tree or on the table as a holiday decoration. 
On the morning before Christmas, the head of the house brings in an oak branch as a symbol of good health or a stack of hay as a symbol of abundance. People fast during the day, and meals that are prepared for the dinner that day are mainly light ones -- beans, fish, potatoes, pies and various salads. Families prepare meat and bake decorated ceremonial bread in preparation for the big event the next day. 
As Christmas dawns, people pray in their homes and then go to church for Holy Mass. Traditionally, they do not visit friends and relatives that day but rather stay at home and celebrate with the immediate family over a plentiful dinner -- this time including roasted meat, as well as various pastries and cakes. 
Kugloff is one of the traditional Christmas cakes among Bosnian Catholics. It is quite simple to prepare: 
Ingredients: 
Preparation: 
Mix egg yolks with sugar. Add butter, raisins or chocolate chips, milk, lemon peel and vanilla sugar. Beat egg whites with a pinch of salt. Add the egg yolk mixture, add flour and baking powder, and stir all together gently. Pour into the kugloff mould and bake for about one hour. 
