24/07/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 24/07/06
The International Organisation for Migration's (IOM) branch in Albania has launched a new project intended to promote legal migration. It aims to provide potential migrants and vulnerable groups with more knowledge about ways they can migrate lawfully. IOM hopes this will contribute to reducing human trafficking. 
"The campaign will be implemented in Tirana, Kukes, Shkodra, Peshkopi, Durres and Vlora for a period of one year. It is these cities that have registered the highest number of illegal immigration and human trafficking in the past," said the chief of IOM mission in Albania, Maurizio Busatti. 
The campaign, called "Legal Migration is a Choice and a Possibility", was initiated by the IOM and will be carried out in partnership with the British Embassy in Tirana, the Albanian National Employment offices, NGOs and local authorities. 
The project includes a public awareness campaign, a survey on migration and anti-trafficking issues, the establishment of a Mobile Information Centre, and training for media professionals as well as personnel at public employment offices. 
The IOM is also setting up a phone line -- to be answered by experts -- that will offer Albanians information about how they can migrate legally to other countries. Finally, a grant will be provided to a local NGO -- Vlora Women's Hearth -- which provides direct assistance to trafficking victims. 
The campaign adheres to the framework set up in the Action Plan of the National Strategy on Migration of the Albanian Government, the Albanian National Strategy for Combating Trafficking in Human Beings (2005-2007), and the EU policies on immigration. 
The IOM, founded in Brussels in 1951 to help with the displacement of persons after World War II, is considered the leading organisation worldwide when it comes to migration issues. It has 116 members and another 21 with observer status, and is said to have provided assistance to some 12 million migrants across the globe. 
