04/11/2004
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 04/11/04
Macedonian citizens will decide between the country's new law on territorial organisation and the old 1996 law in a referendum on Sunday (7 November). The new law -- which would reorganise the state into 83 municipalities, replacing the present 123 sectors -- is intended to implement one of the country's obligations under the Ohrid Framework Agreement. 
According to international officials, the referendum also has implications for Macedonia's bid for eventual membership in NATO and the EU. 
"Decentralisation is a cornerstone of the Ohrid Accord and an essential element to ensure the integration of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia into Euro-Atlantic institutions," NATO Deputy Secretary General Alessandro Minuto Rizzo said last week. 
On Monday, the EU issued a statement saying it respects Macedonia's constitutional right to organise a referendum, while cautioning that a delay in decentralisation would "seriously jeopardise further progress towards the EU". 
The main opposition party, VMRO-DPMNE, along with other parties that oppose the new legislation, argue that it will lead to cantonal division, federalisation of the country and separation along ethnic lines. 
"The statehood is questioned here," said VMRO-DPMNE leader Nikola Gruevski. "We have a historical responsibility to protect the state against division." 
Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska, who is responsible for the country's European integration, says voter rejection of the territorial organisation law would lead Macedonia into an institutional and political crisis, and the consequence would be a delay in meeting the political criteria set by the EU. 
Macedonia would lag behind in the implementation of decentralisation, or the transfer of responsibilities from the government to municipalities, for at least one year, according to Sekerinska. Under the constitution, the results of a referendum cannot be changed for at least one year. 
By law, a turnout of at least 855,000 voters is necessary for a referendum to be successful. The ruling coalition has urged people to stay home, in the hope the vote will fail to reach the minimum turnout requirement. 
