15/01/2010
(AP, Cyprus Mail, Famagusta Gazette - 15/01/10; Cyprus Mail, Sofia Echo, International Press Institute - 14/01/10; AP, FT - 13/01/10; AP, AFP, BBC - 12/01/10; Reuters, DPA - 11/01/10)
Three men have been arrested in connection with the murder of Cypriot media magnate Andy Hadjicostis, police said on Thursday (January 14th) night. That evening, hundreds attended his funeral service. 
Though the identities of the suspects were not released, the Associated Press quoted police as saying the trio would appear in a Nicosia court Friday and be held pending trial. 
The CEO of the family-controlled Dias media group -- which includes the Sigma TV station, radio Proto, the conservative daily newspaper Simerini and several magazines -- Hadjicostis was gunned down late Monday outside his home in an upscale, heavily policed area of downtown Nicosia. 
Cyprus's most powerful publisher, the 41-year-old Hadjicostis was stepping out of his car while speaking on a mobile phone as he was shot twice -- once in the chest and once the back -- at close range. The shooting occurred about 100m from the US Embassy. The gunmen reportedly fled on a motorcycle. 
The murder took place several hours after Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat launched a series of intensive UN-led peace talks. 
Christofias, who is close to the victim's family, interrupted his talks with Talat to visit Hadjicostis's relatives. 
"The police will exhaust all their resources to solve this horrible crime," the AP quoted Christofias as saying on Tuesday. "These are like scenes from an ancient tragedy ... The family's pain is unfathomable." 
"He was a great person, a friend, a person who never harmed anyone," Parliament Speaker Marios Garoyan said of Hadjicostis. "We will not let lawlessness, crime or murders prevail. Our democracy is strong enough to withstand all of this." 
The killing sparked wide speculation, including that its purpose was to derail current efforts to mend a division of more than 35 years between Cypriots of Greek and Turkish heritage on the Mediterranean island. 
But citing evidence from the investigation, police spokesman Michalis Katsounotos said on Wednesday that there was only "a very remote possibility" that the murder was connected to politics. 
