12/07/2004
(International Herald Tribune, Independent, FT - 12/07/04; AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, VOA, Radio B92, Tanjug - 11/07/04)
Boris Tadic was sworn in as Serbia's new president on Sunday (11 July), promising to work for Euro-Atlantic integration during his five-year mandate. He also pledged co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal and called on people in the region to apologise for atrocities committed during the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s.
Tadic, the 46-year-old leader of the Democratic Party (DS), won the post in a 27 June run-off against Tomislav Nikolic, the candidate of the ultranationalist Radical Party. Tadic's victory made him Serbia's first pro-democracy president since World War II.
"No matter what party or coalition is in power in Serbia, European integration remains our common goal and first obligation," Tadic said in his inauguration speech before parliament. He also cited accession to NATO's Partnership for Peace programme as a key objective.
"The future of our nation needs to be associated with a better life, a higher standard of living, and a stable nation. A great challenge is ahead of us and it will not be easy," Tadic said, stressing the need for persistence on the road to Euro-Atlantic integration.
As he addressed lawmakers and foreign guests attending the ceremony, Tadic emphasised the need for co-operation with the UN tribunal in The Hague, describing it as "a crucial precondition for all Euro-Atlantic integration".
"The history of crimes in the Balkans is long and in this regard all nations of this part of Europe owe a historical apology to each other," the president said. "But facing crimes committed by our own people is a precondition for a friendly relationship with our neighbours and lasting establishment of European values."
Tadic said finding a solution to the Kosovo issue would be another key priority during his tenure. "We are deeply devoted to idea of a democratic, rational, European solution for Kosovo based on the UN Security Council's Resolution 1244," he said, stressing the critical need for dialogue between Serbs and Kosovo Albanians.
Representatives of more than 40 countries and international organisations, including the UN, the OSCE, NATO, and the Council of Europe, attended the ceremony, amid tight security. Among the guests were the foreign ministers of Austria, Greece and Slovakia, as well as NATO Commander for Southeastern Europe Admiral Gregory Johnson and the defence ministers of Bulgaria, Macedonia and Romania.
