01/03/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 01/03/07 
Earlier this year, Serbia introduced new high-tech ID cards with chips and biometric data, yet 400,000 Serbian Roma have no identifying documents. They have no registered place of residence, which makes it difficult for them to obtain personal ID's and then causes other social and constitutional rights violations for Roma as a minority. 
According to the new regulation, all citizens over 16, residing in Serbia, must have a new ID card by the end of July 2011. The new IDs will contain a chip with personal data on citizenship, residency and address under an individual citizen number. The biometric data will include a face analysis, fingerprints, signature, digital photo and a digital fingerprint of the holder. 
Minister of Internal Affairs Dragan Jocic has said that the new high tech cards will help fight organised crime and terrorism, improve state institutions and can be used to determine voter lists. 
Out of respect for ethnic minorities' rights, the new registration regulation stipulates that those who observe religious or national customs may have their photo taken while wearing a scarf or hat. The ID cards will be printed in Serbian Cyrillic and English, as well as in the languages of the ethnic minorities. 
According to the Centre for Minority Rights in Belgrade, 400,000 Roma in Serbia cannot be accounted for as they have no permanent place of residence and live in temporary settlements without addresses. Without an address they cannot register for an ID card, and without an ID card the state administration cannot account for them. As an unaccounted minority, Roma's social and constitutional rights are violated, for they cannot exercise the right to education, social or health care without any personal documents. 
"I am not registered and I cannot register my child either. Without proper ID, I have no health care coverage, but have to pay for a doctor's visit. Also, I cannot get a job." says Sevdija Hasari. 
According to the Centre, there are at least two generations of Roma without birth certificates, in Belgrade alone. 
Authorities are not yet addressing the problem seriously, but when they do, it will require better co-operation between the state institutions and NGOs. 
