12/04/2006
(Sofia News Agency, Focus News Agency - 28/03/06; Sofia Echo - 27/03/06; AP, Reuters, AFP, Sofia News Agency, Bulgarian Government - 24/03/06; US Embassy in Bulgaria)
A defence co-operation agreement enabling the United States to use military bases in Bulgaria for training purposes is expected to be officially signed this month. The deal, concluded in late March, is part of a shift in US strategy, envisioning smaller bases than those set up during the Cold War and a more mobile, agile and expeditionary force, better equipped to address the asymmetrical threats of the 21st century. 
"A brigade-size force of some 2,000-3,000 US troops will be deployed at the facilities on rotational basis," US Ambassador to Bulgaria John Beyrle said. He added that the number of soldiers in the bases could reach 5,000. The first US troops are expected to come to Bulgaria in 2007 and 2008. 
US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice is expected to sign the agreement in late April, when she will attend an informal meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Sofia. It will then have to be ratified by the Bulgarian Parliament. The deal is for an initial period of ten years, but either party will have the option to terminate it with a one-year advance notice. 
The sites US forces will use are the Novo Selo military base near Sliven in the east, the air bases of Bezmer near Yambol in the southeast and Graf Ignatievo near Plovdiv in the south, as well as a warehouse near the Black Sea port of Burgas. 
"These are and will continue to be Bulgarian bases under Bulgarian flag and under Bulgarian command," the US embassy said on its web site. "The Bulgarian military facilities will be shared by American troops for training purposes." 
Lyubomir Ivanov, Bulgaria's ambassador to NATO, who also led his country's negotiating team, said the agreement "will make Bulgaria, the United States, Europe, the region, and the world as a whole a little more secure". 
Furthermore, he said, the deal would help improve Bulgaria's armed forces, allowing them to train and work together with one of the best equipped and trained military forces in the world. 
The Bulgarian economy also stands to benefit from the deal, as it is expected to create new jobs in the areas surrounding the facilities and bring tens of millions of dollars in foreign investment, including for the repair of roads, railroad terminals and other infrastructure.Beyrle said Bulgarian contractors and subcontractors would be used whenever possible. 
Bulgarian-American joint military exercises held at Novo Selo in recent years are said to have brought an overall investment of more than $3m to Bulgaria. In the last 13 years, the United States has provided over $100m in security assistance programmes, including military education and training, foreign military financing and humanitarian assistance programmes. 
"Everything that is constructed in the sites, regardless of the investments, becomes Bulgarian property," the Bulgarian government said in a statement. 
