24/11/2005
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 24/11/05
UN special envoy Marti Ahtisaari has completed his three-day visit to Kosovo's capital, Pristina. He is now in Belgrade, for talks Thursday (24 November) with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Serbia-Montenegrin Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic. 
Accompanied by his assistant, senior Austrian diplomat Albert Rohan, the former Finnish president is on a fact-finding tour of the region that will also take him to Skopje and Tirana. 
Speaking to reporters Wednesday, Ahtisaari declined to predict how long the process of resolving Kosovo's status would last. Not only the timeframe, but the ultimate success or failure of the process would depend on co-operation between Pristina and Belgrade, he said. However, he pledged that the talks would proceed at the fastest pace possible. 
He also ruled out any solution that would involve dividing the province, which is technically part of Serbia-Montenegro but has been administered by the UN since 1999. "It is still too early to foresee the future status of Kosovo, however, partition is an option that has been excluded and this was clearly stated by the Contact Group," he said. Serbian President Boris Tadic has proposed splitting Kosovo into two entities, based on ethnic lines -- a position he presented formally to the government on Thursday, after Ahtisaari's arrival. 
While in Kosovo, Ahtisaari met with President Ibrahim Rugova's team of negotiators, who presented him with a document outlining the main talking points for the process. These are based on a ten-point resolution passed unanimously by the Kosovo Parliament last week, stating that independence from Serbia-Montenegro is the "will" of the Kosovo people. 
"Our delegation presented Mr. Ahtisaari with a document on our plans for independence," Rugova said at a press conference. "We expect goodwill from Mr. Ahtisaari and the international community over the question of Kosovo." 
The UN envoy also met with political representatives of the Kosovo Serbs, who voiced their opposition to giving the province independence. "We can't accept any kind of independence," Radio B92 quoted Oliver Ivanovic as saying. "Our most significant role is to insist on decentralisation, freedom of movement, and on changes to the Constitutional Framework which will guarantee that we can't be outvoted on every important issue, especially those that are especially important, and that we insist on the right of refugees to return." 
On Tuesday, Ahtisaari paid a visit to the Serbian Orthodox Monastery of Visoki Decani, where he met with church leaders to discuss the protection of church buildings in Kosovo. 
