26/08/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 26/08/09
Members of Vetevendosje (Self Determination), a local group that opposes UN administration in the country, damaged 28 EULEX vehicles in downtown Pristina on Tuesday (August 25th), in a protest against the expected signing of a police co-operation protocol between EULEX and Serbia. 
 Police arrested 21 members of the group, while an Albanian and four police officers were injured. 
"Since EULEX does not recognise Kosovo, then there is no reason for Kosovo to recognise EULEX," said protest leader Glauk Konjufca. 
"EULEX does not differ from UNMIK; therefore, Vetevendosje will treat it just as UNMIK. We have a problem with the content of the protocol as well as with the EULEX mandate," said Konjufca. 
In a statement after the incident, EULEX condemned the protest. 
"EULEX supports the idea of peaceful protest as an important element in any democratic society, [however] committing criminal damage does not further the interests or the arguments of any such protestors." 
EU Special Representative in Kosovo Pieter Feith condemned the violence. "Let me remind that EULEX came to Kosovo to work for the benefit of all citizens in Kosovo and for Kosovo's European perspective as part of the region. I trust the authorities will conduct a thorough and speedy investigation into today's incidents and will continue to co-operate fully with EULEX as it performs its important functions." 
The government released an official statement calling for peace in Kosovo and supporting EULEX, noting the mission is there at the invitation Kosovo institutions. 
"Its primary aim is to help and support Kosovo authorities in the rule of law field, especially in police, justice and customs. This is why any violent actions against members and assents of this mission is unacceptable and puts at risk the integration of our democratic state in the EU and NATO." 
Also Tuesday, five Albanians and two Serbs were injured in northern Kosovo, where Albanians have been working to rebuild their homes despite opposition from local Serbs. EULEX reported that a hand grenade exploded, shots were fired and several stones were thrown. Tear gas was used to disperse the crowd. 
"EULEX was acting in support of the Kosovo police and in co-ordination with KFOR, in order to preserve public order and to prevent a further escalation of violence. We ask for restraint from both communities. It is up to the parties to resolve this issue through negotiation and dialogue. EULEX stands ready to react to any threat to law and order," the mission said. 
