15/10/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 15/10/07
In 2004, a group of young enthusiasts decided to help the drug prevention programme by organising school children to compete in different sports. Their first project in Split, Croatia, was a success, and since 2004, Youth Sports Games have become an international event for children from various countries. This summer, the games had approximately 35,000 participants. 
Every summer, school children live in summer camps and compete in team sports such as football, basketball, handball and volleyball. They also make new friends, sightsee and swim. 
The project, directed by Zdravko Maric, president of the organisation committee, is applauded by the Croatian government, health institutions and schools, because it promotes fitness and well-being. The children and their parents are pleased that the youth spend summers in a healthy, tutor-supervised environment. 
The games have been recognised internationally due to support from sports celebrities such as David Beckham, who serves as the official ambassador for the Youth Sports Games. 
When Maric started the project as a volunteer, the idea was to promote sports in the Dalmatian city of Split. As participation increased, competitions are held throughout Croatia. 
Maric wants the games to become a regional event, for which the Youth Sports Games would hold venues throughout Southeast Europe. Organisers are seeking international support for the idea. 
To that end, Maric and the games regional co-ordinator, Adnan Terzic, recently proposed the Bistra-Youth Sports Games Project and the concept of the games as a regional sports event to Olli Rehn, the EU commissioner for enlargement. 
Maric says Rehn agreed to be the sponsor of the Bistra-Youth Sports Games. He will also introduce the idea of regionalisation of the Youth Games to Jose Manuel Barroso, the president of the European Commission. 
"Mr Rehn pointed out the importance and necessity of this project for the benefit for region itself, because altruism, religious tolerance and friendship among young people -- the goal of the games -- create basic foundations and conditions for good relations between countries in the region," said Maric. 
