14/11/2011
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb –14/11/11
A little less than a month before the elections, polls suggest the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) faces an uphill battle. 
The party has been shaken by several corruption scandals, including the trial of former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader and a probe that uncovered "black funds" allegedly used to support previous election campaigns. 
Incumbent Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor, who also serves as HDZ leader, confirmed on October 27th that the party is under investigation. According to media reports, HDZ election campaigns in 2003, 2005 and 2007 may have been financed partly with state funds to the tune of 4m euros. 
 Meanwhile, the left-wing opposition is united this time around, having formed the "Kukuriku coalition", as it is known. It consists of the Croatian Social Democratic Party (SDP), the Croatian People's Party (HNS), Istrian Democratic Assembly (IDS) and the Croatian Party of Pensioners (HSU). 
 HDZ leaders remain upbeat, though, insisting that scandals will not dim the party's December 4th election chances. 
"We speak mostly about the economy and social security," HDZ vice president Ivan Jarnjak told SETimes. "HDZ is still the strongest party. I think the story about the current corruption affairs will not affect the final outcome of the elections." 
 HDZ has an official policy of supporting the fight against corruption, Jarnjak said, adding that the ongoing investigations will be a "plus for the party" in the upcoming campaign. But polls show that the opposition coalition currently enjoys a considerable advantage, leading by almost 20%. 
According to a late October poll by the Ipsos Puls agency, Kukuriku currently has 38.8% of voter support, compared to HDZ's 20.3%. 
Branka Valentic, a HSU spokeperson, told SETimes that the ruling party has tried to make up for its deficit in the polls by launching attack ads and negative campaigning. 
 "Despite the attacks on the opposing camp, the coalition will conduct a positive campaign without provocations," he said. 
 Zarko Puhovski, a political analyst and professor at the Faculty of Political Sciences in Zagreb, says that the election result is already clear and that only the margin of victory remains to be seen. 
The main question, he said, is whether HDZ will be a strong opposition or collapse into disarray as its supporters abandon a "sinking ship". 
"The black funds scandal is the most powerful punch to HDZ so far," Puhovski told SETimes. While the opposition is running a relatively low-key campaign and refraining from attacks, he said, the HDZ "is trying to retain voters with patriotic and national stories". Many Croats seems disinterested with the whole process. 
Anita Leka, an unemployed Zagreb resident, says she has lost confidence in politicians and is not planning to vote. 
"When you look at how much corruption exists in the ruling party in a small country such as Croatia, you can only imagine what the scale of corruption is in the European countries where the administration is 100 times larger and there are more politicians and money," Leka told SETimes. 
Split resident Dejan Cabarkapa says the politicians do not care about the local economy. 
"Every political programme is the same. Every day they repeat that when we join the EU it will all be great. And Europe is plagued with debts. Politicians need to ensure that Croatia can find a job for all workers, so we can take care of ourselves and not talk empty stories," Cabarkapa told SETimes, adding that he would "carefully consider " whether to vote in the upcoming elections. 
All the major political parties have made EU accession a centerpiece of their platforms. A significant number of Croats remain eurosceptics, however. 
September polls show that Croats are divided over joining the EU. According to polls, about 40% are against EU accession, 53% favour it, and 7% remain undecided. 
