08/08/2007
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 08/08/07
The number of mobile phones in use in Montenegro far exceeds the number of citizens. Montenegro has a population of around 620,000 citizens -- with an average monthly salary of 326 euros. According to the Telecommunication Ministry, the number of mobile phones in use in the country numbers around 700,000. With last month's entrance of a new mobile provider in Montenegro, the number of mobile phone users in the country increased further. 
 M-tel, a joint venture between Telekom Srbija and Ogalar BV -- a Dutch-based company controlled by Delta Holding -- entered the newly independent country's market at the beginning of July. The company said it sold 12,000 prepaid packages with SIM cards during its first official day of operation. 
This growing phenomenon shows that to Montenegrins a mobile phone is not just a phone, it is a status symbol. Many citizens feel that by joining the mobile trend, they can use their phones as a sign of status. Instead of trying to afford the newest Mercedes, Renault or Peugeot every several years, a cell phone can be switched every few months for a lot less money. 
 Even primary school aged children boast the newest technology, bringing their mobiles with them to school. A few years ago, this age group was competing over the newest model of sneakers from Nike or Reebok -- now they are trying to keep up-to-date with the newest Nokia, Motorola or Samsung. 
The first mobile operator in the country, Pro Monte, owned by Norway Telenor, launched in 1996. T-mobile, owned by German Deutsche telecom emerged in 2002. 
Promonte holds 57.6% per cent of the market; and T-mobile owns 42.2%. M-tel envisages gaining 15% of the market in this year, and 30% in 2008. 
According to data from Promonte and T-mobile, last year in Montenegro 263 million SMS messages were sent within the country. A recent television spot showed that even the elderly population is warming to this means of communication. T-mobile says that 430,000 SMS messages are sent via their network in Montenegro daily. 
Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS), which allows the sending of images, audio and video, has become more widespread across the country this year as well. Promonte says that 20,000 MMS messages are being sent per day through their system. 
