29/10/2007
(WorldNetDaily.com, UNMIK Media Monitoring - 29/10/07; Beta, B92 - 28/10/07; B92 - 27/10/07; RFE/RL, Budapest Business Journal, BIRN - 26/10/07; AFP - 25/20/07)
Voicing opposition to the continuation of talks on Kosovo's final status, beyond the UN-set December 10th deadline, a senior Kosovo Albanian official told a group in Vienna on Saturday (October 27th) that the province may declare independence before Christmas. 
 "Our deputies in the Kosovo Assembly will seek to have a date before Christmas this year set for the proclamation of independence, as well as to inform the international community about this," ORA party leader and member of Pristina's Unity Team, Veton Surroi, a said at a meeting of the Trilateral Commission. 
The negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina are entering a crucial phase when decisions need to be made, he told the group, which was founded by David Rockefeller in 1973 with the goal of fostering closer co-operation between the United States, Europe and Japan. Among the attendees of the Vienna meeting included the troika of international envoys mediating the ongoing talks on Kosovo's future status -- the EU's Wolfgang Ischinger, US Ambassador Frank Wisner and Russian diplomat Alexander Botsan-Kharchenko. 
Kosovo Albanian negotiators are against the continuation of talks on their future after December 10th, when the troika is due to present its report on the results of the negotiations to UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, Surroi also told participants. 
"We have arrived at a point where we are tired of negotiating and need to make decisions," he said. "We've been engaged in talks and we see clearly that it would have been better to have arrived at a solution through negotiations, but we cannot stay hostage to such a formula forever." 
Previously, the members of Kosovo's Unity Team appeared split in their support for a unilateral declaration of independence in the event no solution is reached by December 10th. While President Fatmir Sejdiu and opposition leader Hashim Thaci would not openly support such a move, they have recently signalled a change of stance. 
"We consider that December 10th will mark the end of this negotiation process," the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network (BIRN) quoted Sejdiu as telling reporters earlier this month. "We consider that it ends there. For us it is very important to proceed as quickly as possible." 
The process of determining Kosovo's final status began in February 2006. After leading the largely fruitless negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina for 13 months, former UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari presented his proposals for a settlement in March 2006, which envisioned internationally supervised independence for the province. 
Insisting on retaining some sovereignty over the province, which has been a de facto UN protectorate since June 1999, Serbia immediately rejected the plan and called for further negotiations. 
Western nations withdrew a UN Security Council resolution that would pave the way for the implementation of Ahtisaari's plan earlier this year, in the face of a potential Russian veto. Moscow has made it clear that it will not support any decision on Kosovo's future that is not acceptable to Belgrade. 
Following signals from Kosovo Albanian officials that they may take the matter in their hands and declare independence after December 10th, a number of Western nations have indicated their readiness to recognise an independent Kosovo, even if it is not backed by a UN Security Council decision. 
Germany and a critical mass of EU-member states are prepared to take such a step if the current round of talks between Belgrade and Pristina fail to produce an agreement, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty reported Friday. 
