17/06/2009
(AFP, MIA, Makfax - 16/06/09; UN News Centre - 11/06/09)
Macedonia plans to exert every effort in the upcoming talks with Greece to find a solution to the 18-year-old name dispute between the two neighbours. 
"We are prepared to give a maximum effort in the new round of negotiations in order to take a step forward in the dialogue with Greece," Macedonian Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki said Tuesday (June 16th) after a co-ordination meeting of the country's top officials on the matter. 
The UN-mediated talks are scheduled to restart Monday in Geneva after a four-month break due to the elections in the two countries. The process will kick off with a meeting between negotiators Zoran Jolevski of Macedonia, Adamantios Vassilakis of Greece and UN Special Envoy Matthew Nimetz. 
Given the UN mediator's experience and commitment to the issue, Skopje expects him to be able "to find a way and make an evaluation when and how progress can be made" in the talks, Milososki noted. 
The dispute between the two Balkan nations dates back to 1991, when Macedonia proclaimed independence from the former Yugoslavia. Greece refuses to recognise its neighbour by its constitutional name, Republic of Macedonia, fearing this could imply potential territorial claims over its northern province of Macedonia. 
Instead, it refers to it as the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), the name under which the country was admitted into the UN in 1993, and insists that all other states must do so, too. Most international organisations, including NATO and the EU, officially do that. However, the list of countries recognising the Balkan nation by its constitutional name has grown to more than 120 over the years. 
 UN-led efforts to resolve the dispute between Athens and Skopje intensified last year after Greece blocked Macedonia's NATO entry bid over the issue. In the course of numerous rounds of talks following the Alliance's April 2008 summit in Bucharest, Nimetz presented several possible compromise solutions, but all were rejected by either or both sides. 
Greek officials hinted earlier this year that Athens would accept the name "Republic of Northern Macedonia", as per a proposal the UN mediator tabled in October 2008. 
Milososki said Tuesday his country would try to present its views and ideas on "a possible compromise that is not unilateral or a dictate". Otherwise, the process would lead to one of the parties feeling the winner, while imparting on the other a sense of humiliation and defeat. 
 "I believe that there has to be a middle ground, a compromise, in which certain equality and observing of the dignity and principles of the two sides involved in the dispute is needed in order to achieve a successful and long-term solution on the issue," said the minister. 
Following the Geneva meeting, Nimetz is scheduled to visit Skopje and Athens in early July to meet with government officials there. 
