08/12/2004
(Pressreview.ro, Ziua - 08/12/04; Reporters Without Borders, RFE/RL, Evenimentul Zilei, EurActiv, Mediafax - 07/12/04)
An international media watchdog group voiced concerns Tuesday (7 December) about threats to press freedom in Romania ahead of the weekend presidential runoff. 
"Romania's print media were freer and more critical of the ruling party candidate while the state radio and television allegedly censored and manipulated coverage," Reporters Without Borders said in a statement. This conclusion, it said, was based on a survey conducted jointly with a Romanian organisation, Media Monitoring Agency (MMA), on media coverage of the presidential election campaign from 21 October to 28 November. 
Prime Minister Adrian Nastase, the leader and presidential candidate of the ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD), will face Traian Basescu, the candidate of the opposition National Liberal Party (PNL)-Democratic Party (PD) alliance, in Sunday's runoff. During the first round, Nastase won 40.94 per cent of the vote, a seven-point lead over the Bucharest mayor. 
 Television is the main news source for nearly three-quarters of Romanians. Voicing concern about balance, Reporters Without Borders said the survey showed a marked drop in political coverage ahead of the vote, as well as a "marked lack of debate". 
"We are also worried about reports of censorship and manipulation of the news on the national radio and television," the organisation said. 
The survey found that during a two-week period through 3 November, Nastase had 10 appearances in TV news programmes and Basescu had five. While the reports featuring the prime minister associated him mostly with "acts deemed positive", those featuring the Bucharest mayor most often linked him to acts considered negative. 
The opposition's call for the annullment of the elections sparked an open campaign on state-run TVR1 against Basescu, Reporters Without Borders said. "Fifteen of a total 16 reports were about the annulment call, but only one presented Basescu's viewpoint, while all the other personalities who were asked to express their view (journalists, analysts and politicians) were opposed," the group found. 
Broadcasting executives have said some of the problems found in the survey were due to ambiguous provisions in the electoral law, which they say led journalists to adopt a degree of self-censorship. 
Earlier this week, a reporter with TVR1 accused the ruling party of exercising political pressure on his station. "It is as if we were attached by an umbilical cord to the PSD and to Adrian Nastase in particular," Alexandru Costache wrote in an open letter that followed similar accusations leveled at the state-run radio corporation, Radio Romania. 
Costache said he could no longer allow his professional ethics to be undermined on a daily basis. 
 "We speak about manipulation of news, censorship, bias, the violation of the right to be correctly informed, and even of embezzlement, because using the subscriber's money to send biased messages is not allowed," the reporter said in a separate interview with Evenimentul Zilei daily. He claimed that there had been a number of cases in which he was asked to either present Basescu in a negative light or to ignore his campaign. 
On Tuesday, six TVR journalists and news producers accused state television of "censorship, disinformation practices and propaganda". Censorship, they charged, has peaked during the final stage of the election. 
