01/04/2013
By Kruno Kartus for Southeast European Times in Osijek -- 01/04/13
In an effort to increase transparency and control of Croatian public institutions' spending, one NGO has launched a website to allow the public to monitor the government's procurement contracts and tenders. 
In the 10 days since its launch, the integrityobservers.eu website has more than 700 users who can view and analyse more than 50,000 public tenders and 13,000 contracts, Munir Podumljak, president of Partnership for Community Development, said. 
Public procurement in Croatia accounts for about 16 percent of GDP. 
"Purchasing in Croatia ... amounted to about 3 billion euros. Public procurement is interesting both to countries and development agencies, as well as those who want to illegally profit from one of the world's biggest markets, both on international and national level. By volume, it is the largest process in which public and private interest get in touch and where market exchange of money comes between the public and private sectors," Podumljak told SETimes. 
According to the survey conducted by Transparency International in 2012 on the state of corruption of public officials, businessmen and institutions, Croatia ranks 62nd out of 176 countries. 
However, due to a series of judicial scandals associated with public procurement, most notably the trial of former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, the public is still very concerned about the extent of corruption. 
The Croatian Employers' Association said that although the laws on public procurement have improved in recent years, the government should increase transparency and efficiency. 
"This means first of all, to improve the efficiency of the public procurement process, ensuring optimal allocation of public money from public institutions, but also provide their greater flexibility in negotiating and deciding on the best bidder," Ana Pavlic, a spokeswoman for the association, told SETimes. 
Podumljak said the Croatian Law on Public Procurement from 2012 is one of the most advanced in this part of Europe, but he said many regulations -- including information management, prevention of conflicts of interest and procedures for appointment and employment -- do not have sufficient support. 
"Insufficient support of other provisions of the Public Procurement Act could lead to a series of problems in the implementation, which could lead back to the beginning as far as the development of a system that is already one of the most developed in this part of Europe. All these reasons have led us into the idea of databases and of search tools that will enable citizens to monitor the interested public procurement in real time, on a daily basis," Podumljak told SETimes. 
Goran Gazdek, editor of Virovitica.net online daily, said it is still difficult for the media to obtain procurement information from public institutions, especially details of the financing of certain activities. 
"Tools like Integrity Observers allow [the public] to process ... confusing data," Gazdek told SETimes. 
Tomislav Cerovec, a spokesman for the ministry of economy, said that there is a national Public Procurement Electronic Bulletin, which also publishes such a data, but in a different format. 
Cerovec said that the electronic publication of contract documentation and procurement information substantially improves the transparency of the process. 
"All of these elements, along with other legislative and practical aspects that are in use, significantly contributed to reducing the risk of irregularities, including the risks of corruption. Given the very significant economic scope of public procurement ... it is an area that is exposed to a significant risk of corruption," Cerovec told SETimes. 
 How will publishing the details of procurement contracts reduce the possibility for corruption in the sector? Tell us what you think in the comments.  
