02/11/2005
(UN News Centre, AP, AFP, Reuters, UPI, RFE/RL, Newsroom Finland, YLE, Beta - 01/11/05; Reuters - 29/10/05)
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan officially informed the Security Council on Tuesday (1 November) of his plans to appoint former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari as his special envoy to lead the talks on Kosovo's future status. 
"Ahtisaari's excellent negotiating skills, proven leadership, previous experience with the UN and knowledge of the Balkans make him the ideal person for this endeavour," UN spokesman Stephane Dujarric said at a Tuesday briefing. 
In his letter to the 15-nation body, Annan also named senior Austrian diplomat Albert Rohan as Ahtisaari's deputy in the Kosovo political process, in which the former Finnish president "will have maximum leeway in order to undertake his task". 
Ahtisaari's appointment, which requires formal approval by Security Council, follows the Council's endorsement on 24 October of the start of talks to determine Kosovo's future status. The process likely begins this month. 
While legally part of Serbia-Montenegro, the UN has administered Kosovo since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict there. Among the Kosovo Albanians, who make up 90 per cent of the province's population of nearly 2 million people, hopes run high that the upcoming negotiations will lead to full independence from Serbia-Montenegro. Belgrade, however, opposes outright independence, seeking to retain some form of sovereignty over the province. 
Officials in Pristina welcomed the appointment of Ahtisaari, who served as EU envoy in 1999 and convinced then Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to accept NATO's terms and withdraw Serbian forces from Kosovo. 
"We believe that Ahtisaari ... will set up the framework for the resolution of Kosovo's status on the basis of a set of principles -- the main one being the respect for the will of the majority of the people of Kosovo," the AP quoted Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova's spokesman, Muhamet Hamiti, as saying. 
Quoting diplomatic sources, Reuters reported that Ahtisaari would push for a deal on Kosovo status by mid-2006. He said last week that irrespective of the outcome of the talks, NATO would have to retain its security role in Kosovo for years to come, while the EU would have to play a major part in civil affairs. 
The status talks are expected to initially be in the form of shuttle diplomacy. UNMIK officials suggested that Ahtisaar likely would set up base in Vienna and is expected in Kosovo later this month. He has made clear his plans to first listen to the different parties involved in the process before moving to discussions on "how these problems could be addressed". 
Prior to his involvement in resolving the Kosovo conflict in 1999, Ahtisaari, 68, served as Annan's special representative for the former Yugoslavia in 1993. Most recently, he served as the UN chief's special envoy for the humanitarian crisis in the Horn of Africa. He also was recognised this year for helping negotiate an end to the 30-year armed conflict in the Indonesian region of Aceh. 
In related news, the six-nation Contact Group for Kosovo convenes on Wednesday for a closed-door session. Members will consider a possible date for the opening of status negotiations and discuss how the talks will be conducted. 
