30/06/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 30/06/06
UNMIK head Soren Jessen-Petersen, who stepped down from the post Friday (30 June), said he would come back to Kosovo to welcome the resolution of the province's status. 
"I will be back to celebrate," he said. 
Bidding farewell to lawmakers the previous day, he suggested that Kosovo is only months away from the outcome of status talks, and that an overwhelming number of states in Europe and the world realise that delaying a solution would not promote stability. 
 At the same time, the Danish diplomat urged the majority ethnic Albanian population to reach out to the Serb minority, saying Kosovo's future must be a multiethnic one. 
"I know the goal of the majority is independence, and I count on you as you realise your dream that it becomes a dream to be shared by all communities," Jessen-Petersen said. "The realisation of your dream must not be a nightmare for others," he said. 
 "Kosovo was multiethnic, is multiethnic and should be. The current Europe doesn't have a place for a monoethnic society. In this, my last speech, I appeal to you to do everything possible to create a functional multiethnic society. This you can do with the dialogue and meetings, creating a slogan: 'Let me shake hands with my neighbour today'," Jessen-Petersen said. 
The fifth person to hold the post, Jessen-Petersen succeeded Finland's Harri Holkeri in August 2004. His tenure saw the launch of direct talks between Belgrade and Pristina, intended to hash out agreement on decentralisation and other issues, and eventually to tackle the status question. Several rounds of the talks have now been held, although the two sides remain far apart. 
Legally still part of Serbia, Kosovo has been under UN administration since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict. While most Kosovo Albanians favour independence, Serbia is arguing instead for "substantial autonomy", while insisting the province should remain part of its territory. 
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica reiterated that position Wednesday during a visit to a Serb enclave in Kosovo. 
In his address Thursday, Jessen-Petersen said he has witnessed an increase in democracy, maturity, and the political will to face crises. "For that, I believe that in your hands, Kosovo will be a very strong society," he said. 
But he also warned that Kosovo faces the prospect of instability if the status issue is not resolved soon. 
 "Without status, the economic hardship that so many Kosovars face will continue," and the province would become a "ticking social time bomb which in time will be impossible to manage," Jessen-Petersen said, describing the current situation as unsustainable. 
