29/05/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 29/05/12
Since the end of wars in the former Yugoslav republics, both the Council of Europe and the EU have encouraged fairness and honesty in how historical figures and events are depicted in school textbooks. The aim is to eradicate bias and prejudice, but as one new report finds, this has not yet happened in Albania, Serbia and Kosovo, where nationalism and subjectivity dominate the books. 
Shkëlzen Gashi, a political scientist and author of several books on Kosovo politics, wrote the report called "Kosova 1912-2000: In the history books of Kosova, Albania and Serbia," to find out how the three depict Kosovo's history since the fall of Ottoman Empire. The differences, he found, are vast. 
"The language used in texts of Kosovo and Serbia, not in those of Albania, often [involve] labeling. Kosovo texts use labels such as 'bloodthirsty terrorist acts,' 'state terror and genocide' or 'horrifying scenes of bloody barbarism squadrons.' The texts of Serbia, on the other hand use labels such as 'local Albanian gang attacks' and 'Albanian terror against Serbs.' These texts rarely provide data to quantify the crimes, and even when they do, it is overstated," Gashi told SETimes. 
The report, prepared for the Kosovar Association for Human and Children’s Rights, concluded that the single most important elements of Kosovo's history between 1912 and 2000 are the crimes committed by Serbs -- organised into regular army and police -- against Albanians; as well as the crimes that Albanians -- largely unorganised -- committed against the Serbs. Both sides present only the crimes of the other, and portray themselves as victims of aggression. 
"Characteristic of the texts of these three countries, in terms of presenting the history of Kosovo in the 1912-2000 timeframe [are] inaccuracies, fabrications, exaggerations, distortions and so forth," Gashi said. Kosovo's textbooks have the most, compared to the others, "because in these texts the space dedicated to the history of Kosovo is naturally greater." 
He found that the textbooks in Kosovo and Serbia use more hardline language when describing crimes committed on both sides. In Albania, said Gashi, authors avoided exaggerating key numbers. "The texts of Albania are more cautious as regards the presentation of crime figures." 
Bruim Rrahmani, a researcher at the Kosovo Society for Social Research, told SETimes that the rhetoric and misuse of the facts in textbooks does little to contribute to reconciliation between Albanians and Serbs. 
"The language is not scientific, and the facts are not presented in a scientific manner. This contributes to hatred among those nations, and do not enable dealing with the past. This can be changed only by a stricter EU policy on the issue of the textbooks, which surprisingly has not been raised in the Balkans enlargement process, as it was with the Eastern European countries," said Rrahmani. 
Fidane Berisha, a historian from Pristina, told SETimes that the history textbooks have been revised more recently, at least in Kosovo. "I think that history writing is an ongoing process, and politics should not interfere in it," he said. 
Gashi's report, written in Albanian, Serbian and English, assesses textbooks approved by the education ministries of Serbia, Albania and Kosovo for use in both primary and secondary curricula. 
"I hope this report will be read with care [by the ministries to] eliminate inaccuracies, fabrications, exaggerations and distortions, which are identified in the report," he said. 
