10/04/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 10/4/06
With its rich natural environment, cultural and historical heritage and mild Mediterranean climate, Croatia has been rapidly climbing the ranks of worldwide tourist destinations. The small Mediterranean country boasts mountains, a beautiful Adriatic coastline, and thousands of islands, appealing to a wide range of visitors. 
The country's potential was highlighted at a March conference in Vienna on European tourism, with Austrian Economy and Labour Minister Martin Bartenstein forecasting a major boost for Croatian tourism once the country enters the EU. 
His optimism was echoed by Guenther Verheugen, the EU's commissioner for enterprise and industry, who told reporters that Croatia is making significant advances in developing its tourism industry. 
The conference, titled "Tourism and Culture -- A Key to Development and Employment in Europe", drew tourism officials and ministers from EU countries, acceding countries, candidates for membership, and Western Balkan states aiming to become candidates in the future. Croatian Tourism Ministry State Secretary Zdenko Micic led Zagreb's delegation. 
Over the past three years, Croatia has seen the number of overnight stays rise, achieving a high rate of international tourist arrivals. More than 47.8 million visitors come to Croatia each year, most from Germany, Italy and Slovenia. Tourism accounts for some 20 per cent of the annual GDP. 
Despite the great potential, however, the industry has suffered from a lack of investment and expertise. In the past, marketing has been ineffective and management skills were in short supply. 
Visitors often found hotels in a state of disrepair, with damage from the war years and subsequent use as housing for refugees. Moreover, the country's roads have been in no condition to absorb an annual mass influx of visitors. The result has been severe congestion during the peak season. 
Upgrading the infrastructure and privatising the industry are widely seen as the keys to fully developing Croatian tourism, and the government has been pushing ahead in both areas. The privatisation process has gone slowly, amid reports of corruption and disinterest among investors. Greater success has been achieved in upgrading the road system, improving services, removing bureaucratic red tape and securing trained staff. 
Meanwhile, the worldwide "buzz" about Croatia continues to gather momentum -- Dubrovnik has been hailed as a top site by The New York Times and Lonely Planet, and visitors increasingly look to the country as a possible alternative to more expensive destinations in the region. 
