19/11/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 19/11/04
As many as 3 million landmines may have been planted in Croatia during the Balkan conflicts of the 1990s, posing a continued threat to civilians -- especially farmers, children, hunters, forest workers, and mine-clearers -- long after the end of hostilities. According to the Croatian Mine Action Centre, 14 of the nation's counties are contaminated with mines -- an area amounting to 1,600 sq km. Parliament adopted a national mine action programme in October 2000, but mine removal personnel say efforts are lagging. Unions and employers have both rejected the parliament's latest report on the progress mine-removals, saying it does not reflect reality. 
"Among this year's successes there is mention of fields that the farmers entered at their own initiative. That is our disgrace, and not a success," says Boris Katic, president of the Croatian Association of Employers for Humanitarian Mine Removal. 
"There is talk of outstripping the mine removal plan for 2003 by 257 per cent, with half the money," Katic says. Meanwhile, mine-clearers and their employers have united in demanding that wages be calculated hourly, at a minimum of 4.7 euros per hour. They say that around 66m euros are needed for mine removal annually, as compared to the 39m euros earmarked so far. 
Experts say that up to 110 sq km that were declared "clean" this year may actually still contain mines. Because of this, employers are refusing to accept responsibility if someone gets injured in those areas. Last year only one person was injured, while so far this year, ten people have been injured. 
The president of the Union of Mine Removal Workers, Drazen Kis, says the government has yet to make good on promises that a new law on humanitarian mine removal will be adopted. "If things continue at this rate," he says, "Croatia will not be cleaned up from mines in the next 30 years. If things remain that way, we will be the only member of the EU with mine pollution, if at all we are allowed to enter the EU in this condition." 
 "We will try to contact Deputy Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor, who supported us while she was still in the opposition, to see why the law has not yet entered parliamentary procedure," Kis says. 
Mine-clearers are asking the state to require public companies to earmark resources on an annual basis for mine removal, just as they do for firefighters. Employers say mine removal is a key to faster return of refugees and the creation of new jobs 
