03/05/2006
(Kathimerini, Focus - 03/05/06; AP, ANA-MPA, ERT, FENA, MIA, Turkish Press, The New Anatolian - 02/05/06)
A two-day summit of countries in the Southeast European Co-operation Process (SEECP) opened in the northern Greek port city of Thessaloniki on Wednesday (3 May) with a meeting of member nations' foreign ministers. It will be followed Thursday by a closed-door session -- chaired by Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis -- of the heads of state or government of the nine-nation group. 
The SEECP includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Macedonia, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro and Turkey. Moldova has observer status. The rotating, one-year SEECP chairmanship is currently held by Greece, which will hand it over to Croatia after the summit. 
Among the leaders participating in the meeting are Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, BiH Presidency Chairman Sulejman Tihic and Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski. Others attending the forum include the UN special envoy for the Kosovo status talks, Martti Ahtisaari, OSCE Secretary General Marc Perrin de Brichambaut and Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe Special Co-ordinator Erhard Busek. Japanese Deputy Foreign Minister Akiko Yamanaka is attending Wednesday's session as a guest speaker. 
The EU membership prospects of the Southeast European (SEE) countries and regional co-operation are the main issues on the agenda. Summit participants will also discuss the role of the SEECP in a future modification of the Stability Pact and current developments in the region, including the situation in Kosovo. The transport ministers of member nations are expected to sign an agreement Thursday establishing a high-speed rail network in the SEE region. 
"We have very close co-operation with the other countries," Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis said on Tuesday. "Good regional co-operation always bears positive results for all the peoples in the area." 
Greece is the only EU member within the group. Bulgaria and Romania are scheduled to join the Union in January, while Turkey and Croatia began their membership talks with Brussels several months ago. The Western Balkan countries are at different stages of the EU integration process. 
Apart from the official joint sessions, a number of bilateral meetings are expected on the sidelines of the summit. 
The meeting that has generated the greatest media interest is the one between Karamanlis and Erdogan on Thursday, which Turkish media have described as aimed at reviving confidence-building measures between the two NATO members. 
Karamanlis also is scheduled to meet with Crvenkovski for the first time in 18 months. According to the Greek daily Kathimerini, the focus of those talks will be bilateral trade rather than the name dispute between the two neighbours. 
Bakoyannis is expected to hold separate meetings with her counterparts from Albania, Macedonia and Serbia-Montenegro. 
