20/09/2010
By H.K. Tzanis and Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Athens and Zagreb -- 20/09/10
Football matchups between Croatia and Greece have been rare since Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia in 1990. But that is about to change. 
 The two countries are vying to qualify for the Euro 2012 football championship, and two clubs from each will face off in the UEFA Europa league. Six matches have been scheduled through December -- three in each country. 
This on-the-field action is coming amid stepped up efforts by Athens and Zagreb to boost bilateral political and trade relations, especially given Croatia's high-profile presence in the EU's antechamber. 
Greek football has a strong "Yugoslav connection" despite the rarity of encounters between national teams. A number of Croatian -- as well as Bosnian and Serbian -- internationals play for both AEK Athens and PAOK Thessaloniki, including emerging PAOK goalkeeper Dario Kresic. 
Those teams will now face Hajduk Split and Dinamo Zagreb. 
AEK's manager is Dusan Bajevic, the legendary 1970s-era Velez Mostar and later AEK striker. 
Hajduk captain Srdjan Aleksic played in Panathinaikos Athens, a team which boasts a "Croatia connection" of star players. Dinamo's Ante Rukavina previously played in Panathinaikos. 
The first of six matches between the national teams ended in a goal-less draw in Zagreb on September 7th, while the AEK-Hajduk game started Group G of the Europa League last Thursday (September 16th) in which AEK won 3-1. 
The rematch is on December 1st in Split. 
Dinamo will face PAOK in Thessaloniki on September 30th in Group D before a rematch in Zagreb on December 16th. 
Croatian fans' expectations are extremely high. According to a poll in the Split daily Slobodna Dalmacija, 75% of respondents say they would pay more for bread if that would get Hajduk into the next round. 
To fans, it would be an ideal present for next year's 100th anniversary of Hajduk's founding. 
"Hajduk was one of [Yugoslavia's] top four teams, along with Dinamo, Crvena Zvezda and Partizan Belgrade, although there were other good teams too, like mine, Velez," Bajevic told SETimes. 
Asked to pinpoint the reason for the success of Yugoslav national and individual teams, Bajevic cited the emphasis on youth academies. 
"Youth football academies were everywhere; all of the schools had teams that played in championships. A [youth] championship was held in my city, Mostar, with teams from the surrounding regions throughout the summer," he said. Bajevic particularly praises Hajduk's fans -- "Torcida" -- known internationally for their spectacular support and loyalty. 
 "I know they place a huge emphasis on creating a supportive atmosphere, and the play is always good," Bajevic said. 
One Split fan, 33-year-old Ivan S., said, "I will travel everywhere to support Hajduk. I don't care if I have to walk to see them play in Europe. We have been waiting for this for so long." 
"We will try to keep Hajduk's European glow strong," promises Hajduk coach Stanko Poklepovic. He says the players must put aside past memories of a European championship and concentrate on the present. 
 "Playing against AEK will be difficult because the atmosphere in Greece is quite similar to the one a Greek team can expect in Split. The fans want victory and they are loud, dedicated to their team, willing to support them during the entire 90 minutes of the game," Poklepovic said. 
Dinamo Zagreb is a formidable team with significant international experience, but it has no easy task against PAOK. A most successful club in Croatia, Dinamo's claim to fame includes winning the Inter-cities cup in the 1966/1967 season. 
With the arrival of Vahid Halilhodzic -- considered a coaching legend in France where he led several teams -- Dinamo enters the UEFA League's competition with more ambitions than ever. 
 "We will be ready and we will try to achieve a goal never achieved before. We have every right to be optimists," said Halilhodzic. 
He considers Spain's Villareal a favourite in the group but does not underestimate the other opponents. "Still, I think we have an equal chance to get to the second position in the group," he adds. 
