11/05/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 11/05/07
Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) government managed to win parliamentary backing Thursday (May 10th) for a major constitutional amendment that will allow the president to be elected directly by voters. The controversial move is expected to stoke fresh tension between secularists, and the government, which has roots in political Islam. 
The main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) harshly criticised the move, saying such a significant change in the political system should not be rushed through without proper debate. CHP boycotted the vote. However, the right-wing Motherland Party backed the AKP's proposal, which opens the door for directly electing the president to a five-year term, renewable for a further five years. 
Under the current system, Parliament elects the president for a non-renewable seven-year term. Changes also foresee holding general elections every four years instead of five, and reducing the number of lawmakers needed to reach a quorum. 
President Ahmet Necdet Sezer must sign the amendment for it to become law. However, the staunch secularist has signalled that he might exercise his veto power
Secularists and liberals fear that checks and balances in the democratic system could be undermined if the way of electing the president is changed. There is also concern that the AKP could hold both the presidency and a majority in parliament.
Turkey's influential business association TUSIAD also criticised the move in a recent statement.
"The parliamentary system in our country is the result of a historical process. Attempting to change the essence of this system will open the way for uncertainty in our political system," it said. 
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the AKP leader, struck a defiant note Thursday, saying that if Sezer uses his veto, the government will send the measure back to Parliament for re-approval. If approved for a second time, Sezer would be forced to either endorse it or call for a referendum on the issue. 
"I don't see the AKP as being serious in its move to amend the constitution," political science professor Turker Alkan wrote in the daily Radikal on Friday. Rather, he suggested, the aim is to impress voters: Early general elections are scheduled for July 22nd. 
"Why has the AKP waited for so many long years to introduce such changes?" Alkan wrote. "Their aim by rushing through it today is now to create a particular image in public opinion. The message to the electorate ahead of early elections is: increase your support for me so that I can introduce such major changes easier in my second term." 
Turkey's military, which views itself as the guardian of the secular state, has made no public comment on the constitutional change. However, military chief General Yasar Buyukanit met for two hours with Erdogan last week. Turkish generals have indicated they oppose any presidential candidate with an Islamist background. 
In Turkey's parliamentary democracy, the president is commander in chief of the armed forces. He also appoints governors, ambassadors, police chiefs, university rectors and senior judicial officials. 
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, who withdrew his presidential bid after being unable to secure parliamentary approval, remained open on Friday to the possibility of running if the constitutional change is finalised. 
Should that happen, Gul told reporters, "My candidacy continues." 
