11/01/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 11/01/07
On Sunday (January 7th), Macedonian customs officers at the Blace border crossing discovered 483kg of cocaine -- a record amount -- heading from Venezuela to Greece. The shipment was concealed in 882 buckets of white acrylic paint. 
Although the street value was estimated at 46m euros, Macedonian police experts say it could have reached up to 92m euros, because street dealers mix the drugs with neutral substances such as flour or face powder. The shipment was prime for mixing because it consisted exclusively of pure, high-quality cocaine. 
Macedonian Customs Administration Director Vanco Kargov said the drugs travelled from Venezuela to the Montenegrin port of Bar, where they were loaded onto a truck with Macedonian license plates, driven by a Macedonian national, Alija Azirovic who drove it into Kosovo. 
According to Kargov, Macedonian customs officers responded after a tip from UNMIK customs officers in Kosovo. But Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski later gave a different account, saying Macedonian police had independently discovered and traced the truck. 
It was stopped, sealed and scanned. The paint buckets were found to contain 400 packets of a powdery substance, which laboratory tests identified as cocaine. 
Regional media have been reporting that a Macedonian-born resident of Serbia, Stanislava Cocorvska-Poletan, was behind the operation. She is said to be the owner of the two front companies that took part in the drug transport. The first one, Makfut, was registered in Serbia. The second, Searose Company Ltd, was registered in Greece and posed as the buyer of the paint. 
Poletan was an associate of the late Serbian paramilitary gang leader Zeljko "Arkan" Raznatovic and was "likely continuing with his business," the Beta news agency quoted the editor of the weekly Vreme, Dejan Anastasijevic, as saying. According to the Macedonian Interior Ministry, Makfut provided alcohol and tobacco products to duty-free shops during the Milosevic era. 
The cocaine discovery set a new Balkan record, outdoing the previous one, set by the police forces of Italy, Montenegro and Serbia in 2004. It involved 202kg of cocaine transported from Venezuela via Bar to Novi Sad. 
