11/03/2005
(AP, Reuters, AFP, Bloomberg, BBC, VOA, Radio B92, ICTY - 10/03/05)
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has charged former Kosovo Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj with 37 counts of war crimes. The indictment against him and two other ex-members of the now-disbanded Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) was made public Thursday (10 March), one day after all three indictees surrendered to The Hague court. 
Haradinaj, 36, resigned Tuesday after receiving the indictment, insisting that he is innocent. He is the most senior KLA member to face charges brought by the court in connection with the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo. 
The crimes referred to in the indictment allegedly took place between March 1998 and 30 September the same year. At that time, the indictment states, Haradinaj had overall control of the KLA's operations in its Dukagjin operational zone in western Kosovo, close to the border with Albania and Montenegro. 
 The charges against him include 17 counts of crimes against humanity for persecution, murder, rape, inhumane acts, destruction of property, unlawful detention, deportation or forcible transfer of civilians. He faces an additional 20 counts of violations of the laws or customs of war for cruel treatment, murders and rape. 
The indictment further charges that Haradinaj and two former allies -- Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj -- were members of a joint criminal enterprise whose aim was to consolidate the KLA's total control of the region, to remove Serb civilians from that area and to suppress "any real or perceived form of collaboration with the Serbs by Albanian or Roma civilians there". 
In pursuit of that goal, UN prosecutors say, the KLA fighters resorted to war crimes, including intimidation, abduction, imprisonment, beating, torture and murder of targeted civilians. 
Balaj, 33, commanded a special KLA unit, known as "The Black Eagles". Brahimaj, 35, according to UN prosecutors, was a close relative of Haradinaj and his subordinate, acting as deputy commander of the Dukagjin operative staff. Both men reported directly to Haradinaj and worked closely with him. Each has been charged with a total of 35 counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war. 
As a KLA commander, the indictment said, Haradinaj "established a system whereby individuals were targeted for abduction, mistreatment and murder, and whereby a systematic attack on vulnerable sections of the civilian population was carried out". 
According to prosecutors, he "condoned and encouraged" the criminal conduct of his subordinates and "on some occasions, personally ordered, controlled and participated in beatings". They further allege that "on at least one occasion, [he] gave his tacit approval as commander for detained persons to be executed". 
The three are expected to make their first appearance before UN judges and enter their pleas in the coming days. If convicted on any charge, Haradinaj could face life imprisonment. 
