28/04/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 28/04/10
Serbs are closely following the trial of 14 suspects charged in the brutal beating death of French soccer fan Brice Taton, a supporter of the club Toulouse. Proceedings opened on April 21st when 12 of the defendants entered the courtroom along with their attorneys. 
Two remaining suspects -- Djordje Prelic and Dejan Puzigaca -- are on the lam and are being tried in absentia. Police say Prelic is hiding in a nearby country and that Puzigaca is believed to be in Kosovo. 
All of the defendants are fans of the Belgrade team Partizan. 
Taton sustained fatal injuries after being hit by baseball bats and torches while sitting at a downtown Belgrade café with other Toulouse fans on September 17th 2009. He died 12 days later. 
Prosecutors say the assault on French fans was organised and co-ordinated via mobile phones and text messages. Carrying those torches and bats, Partizan fans allegedly showed up at the café. 
All 12 of the defendants who were present for their arraignment pleaded not guilty. When they walked into the courtroom, friends, family and supporters applauded. 
 "I was not involved in that fight. I can stand before Brice Taton's parents, look them squarely in the eye and say that I did not beat up their son," said Ivan Grkic, one of the defendants. 
The trial's importance is highlighted by the presence of Jean-Francois Terral, the French ambassador to Belgrade. He told reporters he has faith in the Serbian judiciary. 
"A French citizen is in question and it is my duty to be here," he said. "I want justice to be served and the sentence to be appropriate for the act committed." 
The victim's parents -- Suzanne and Alain Taton -- were initially prevented from attending the trial by the eruption of a volcano in Iceland that sent heavy ash and dust across Europe, suspending air travel for several days. They expect to land in Belgrade soon. 
"We hope that the perpetrators of this barbaric act will be severely punished ... that is what the Serbian government promised us," the couple told the Toulouse daily newspaper La Depeche du Midi. 
"It has been seven months since the death of our son. Our life has been broken," the Tatons said. "We hope to find the answers to this deadly madness and, above all, find out who [the guilty] individuals are." 
Members of the public say they were appalled by the murder. 
"Something like this must never happen to us again, which is why the sentence must be very severe," French language teacher Milan Tokovic, who attended the trial, told SETimes. 
