25/06/2013
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 25/06/13
Ten kilometres from Podgorica is Tuzi, a small town mostly inhabited by ethnic Albanians, and home to a mix of Roman Catholics and Muslims. 
Tuzi and the Malesija region of southeastern Montenegro have long enjoyed a reputation for religious tolerance. The town experienced urban development in the 1990s, including renovations to the local mosque and Catholic church. Most residents of the Malesija region are Albanians. 
But recently the interfaith harmony has been disrupted by several incidents that some said are linked to questions about Tuzi's political future. 
Among the disturbances was a massive dispute between Muslim and Catholic high school students that resulted in injuries to three students and 50 arrests. The brawl was followed days later by a disagreement over a graveyard in a village near Tuzi. The Muslim population claimed their Catholic neighbors were forbidden from burying their deceased in the graveyard. 
While church and mosque leaders debate the role of religion in these disputes, a member of Montenegro's opposition said the incidents were politically motivated, coming prior to a decision on whether Tuzi will remain an urban municipality within Podgorica or become independent. 
During the election campaign in 2012, the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) promised Tuzi citizens they would have an independent municipality by 2014. However, there is still no sign of a referendum on the issue. 
Vaselj Sinistaj, an Albanian member of Montenegro's parliament, said DPS wants Tuzi to remain an urban municipality. 
"This is a political issue. I am more than ever assured that the ruling party wants to divide us. Tuzi wants its own municipality and that wouldn't be good for the ruling party since most of the votes in Podgorica for DPS come from this region," Sinistaj told SETimes, echoing an opinion that has been expressed by others in Tuzi. 
Many people SETimes spoke with in Malesija agree that religion is being used as a political tool. 
"This region was always a symbol of interfaith harmony and tolerance. Not many places in Montenegro are like Tuzi, and we are trying to keep that peace," Fadilj Ivezaj, a resident of Tuzi, told SETimes. 
Mirko Blagojevic, sociologist and visiting professor at the University of Sociology in Niksic, said this issue should be taken seriously. 
"As long as society works well, there won't be problems, but soon after there is a small crack, religion or similar problems can become a trigger for something bigger. Perfect example is Yugoslavia between 1945 and 1989. For 45 years there weren't any significant incidents, but then in a short time they developed and escalated. It doesn't mean that it is bound to happen here, but this means people are getting nervous," Blagojevic told SETimes. 
Nikola Gegaj, a DPS member and former mayor of Tuzi, said that although the situation is unfavorable for both sides, it is unlikely to be radicalised. 
"Albanians of both faiths are connected by blood. There is countless number of fraternities and friendships between us. We always used words to solve problems. Albanians from this region used to go in other parts of Montenegro and reconcile others, so why should we make problems in our own yard?" Gegaj told SETimes. 
What role is the status of Tuzi municipality playing in recent disputes between Muslims and Catholics? Share your thoughts in the comments section.  
