23/07/2004
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 23/07/04
During his visit to the United States this week, Romanian Prime Minister Adrian Nastase assured President George W. Bush of "Romania's constant support" in the war against terrorism, as well as his personal support of Bush's vision "not only on general issues, but very specifically on a very complex process of changes in Iraq".
After their meeting Wednesday (21 July), Nastase told reporters he had offered "a five star-location for US military bases", adding that a decision would be made soon.
Bush praised Romania's determination to fight terror and its support for the reconstruction and democratisation process in Iraq. "We talked about the need to continue to work together to spread freedom and, therefore, peace in troubled parts of the world," he said. Romania currently has missions in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and Afghanistan, and a 700-strong military presence in Iraq.
On the subject of trade, Nastase asked Bush to spread the word that "Romania is a good place to invest." The US president urged the continuation of economic reforms, stressing that bilateral economic co-operation would be boosted as market conditions improve.
During his three-day visit to the United States, Nastase met with business leaders, held talks with Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and Secretary of State Colin Powell, and chaired a meeting of the UN Security Council. He also met with UN Secretary General Kofi Annan.
According to analysts, the visit was partly intended to rebuild Nastase's political credibility following the ruling Social Democrat Party's poor showing in last month's local elections and a dispute with President Ion Iliescu, the party's founder. While in New York, Nastase said he was "95 per cent ready" to run in the fall presidential elections.
"If the polls and the analysis show -- as some of my colleagues consider will be the case -- that I am the best candidate of my party, well, of course, I shall run," he was quoted as saying.
