17/01/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 17/01/11
Hardly anyone in Turkey is against the government's visa-free neighbourhood policy, which already consists of more than 60 states, a goal Turkey is pursuing with many countries. 
Yemen -- home to Ottoman heritage as it is believed in Turkey, as well as a hub for Islamic jihadists, including al-Qaeda -- still remains on the US Department of State's Travel Warning List due to terrorism activities. 
In 2003, Turkey's Foreign Ministry also urged its citizens to avoid visiting Yemen for security reasons, but the caution proved temporary. 
Eight years later, the two Muslim nations signed a series of political and economic agreements, including one on the visa issue, last week.
"When the agreement comes into power, the citizens of the neighbouring countries can spend up to 90 days during every 180 days," says the Turkish foreign ministry's official web site. 
Mustafa Kabakci, a government spokesmen on Yemen, and a member of the Turkey-Yemen Friendship Group in the Turkish parliament, says the visa-free agreement was a "desire of the Turkish people". 
 "Our society is very sensitive on the Yemen issue. There are lots of our people there since the Ottoman Empire; hundreds of our martyrs are there. [Ottomans lost around 30,000 soldiers in Yemen during World War I, fighting against European and Russian armies.] So we can never ignore or lose Yemen," Kabakci told SETimes. 
The key purpose of Gul's visit last week was to bring peace to the region, Kabakci says, adding that now it is time for Yemenis and Turks to move forward by strengthening bilateral trade and investment. 
Having lifted visa entry requirements for Jordanians, Libyans, Syrians and Lebanese, Ankara has expressed the same argument. 
But some domestic and international analysts believe that Turkey's visa-free project with such unstable countries could create serious problems. 
 "Turkey's visa free neighborhood policy is probably well-intentioned, but naive," Gareth Jenkins, a writer and analyst based in Istanbul, tells SETimes. He is a Senior Associate Fellow with the Joint Centre's Silk Road Studies Programme and Turkey Initiative of the Johns Hopkins University. 
The problem is, Jenkins argues, visa requirements make it much easier to control not only how many enter a country, but also who they are. He points out that lifting visa restrictions on countries to Turkey's south and east makes it much easier for would-be illegal migrants seeking to enter Europe via Turkey. 
Perhaps more serious is the impact that Turkey's visa-free policy has on the global struggle against terrorism, the analyst mentions, adding that removing visas makes it much more difficult not only for the countries trying to track the movement of terrorists, but also for Turkey's own security. 
Serdar Erdurmaz, an Ankara-based security analyst from the Turkish Centre for Strategic Analysis, says one of the reasons the government is setting visa-free regimes with Arab countries is that Ankara has doubts about its EU membership process. 
 "If we would get any sign from the EU, things would be different. Turkey now says, if you don't accept us, then we can create our own way," Erdurmaz told SETimes. 
He says Turkey has its own spot in the Arab world and it doesn't harm European policy. Kabakci, however, disagrees. A visa-free policy in its neighborhood is not meant to be an alternative to the EU membership. 
"Our direction is EU. But as a model country, we have peace interest in the Arab world. We're continuing our efforts towards EU integration." 
Building better economic ties with Gulf countries is not unethical towards Europe, he says. 
