28/05/2010
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 28/05/10
Thousands gathered last week in Belgrade for the 4th annual Days of Sarajevo festival. From May 19th to the 23rd, more than 15 stages featured theatre performances, concerts, films and exhibitions. The festival, organised by the Belgrade-based Youth Initiative for Human Rights, aims to encourage communication and help build new relationships between young people from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia. 
The festival's mission is to allow participants from Sarajevo -- nearly 300 artists this year -- to provide a clear picture of various aspects of the city and in turn, negate the existing stereotypes. 
 The festival opened with an exhibition of Sarajevo photographers. Called OBJEKTIV No 1, the show portrayed daily life in the capital captured "through the lenses of young photographers". 
Several panel debates also took place, including one on the past and future of the two countries' relationship. Other discussions focused on violence at sporting events and "Relations in the Region, 15 Years after the Dayton Peace Accords". 
 Many fans came out to see the young Sarajevo bands. "The programme at this year's festival was great; [these] are the bands that I would recommend to all of Sarajevo to see," Damir Imamovic told SETimes 
They played everything from rock and electronic music to the traditional Bosnian music called Sevdah. Sevdah singer Amira Medunjanin and jazz pianist Bojan Zulfikarpasic each drew large crowds. 
 "Sarajevo musicians have always been the best in the former Yugoslavia! Belgrade is the cultural centre of the Balkans, Sarajevo is the capital of music of the Balkans," Belgrade student Vladimir Sreckovic told SETimes regarding Zulfikarpasic's concert. 
Other performances made impressions on audience members as well. The Sarajevo War Theatre's rendition of Eugene Ionesco's "This is Ionesco, You Fool", portrays a reflection of the conscience of young people and addresses problems society faces. 
Festival organisers honoured Centre for Cultural Decontamination CEO Borka Pavicevic for her contributions to strengthening ties between Belgrade and Sarajevo. 
"When you see the beauty that Sarajevo possesses, let's do everything we can to put down all prejudice and preserve in it everything possible so that Sarajevo will grow and develop to be the city of the future," Pavicevic said after receiving her award. 
According to Youth Initiative for Human Rights Director Maja Stojanovic, Pavicevic laid the foundation for Days of Sarajevo. 
"Because of her and a small number of people similar to her, today we are not starting from zero. Borka's personal convictions give us strength and faith that it is possible to withstand human stupidity, nationalism and war destruction," said Stojanovic. 
