11/04/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 11/04/07
 The Belgrade war crimes court sentenced four members of a Serbian paramilitary unit Tuesday (April 10th) to a combined 58 years in prison for killing six Muslim men from Srebrenica. 
A fifth member of the so-called Scorpions unit, Aleksandar Vukov, was acquitted due to lack of evidence of his involvement in the killings, which took place near the village of Trnovo in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
The defendants themselves shot video footage of the execution, used as evidence in court, in July 1995. It shows them taking the six captives, three of them minors, out of a truck. The recording ends with the Scorpions killing the tortured captives one by one, shooting them in the back. 
Serbian prosecutors determined that the victims were Admir Alispahic, Safet Fejzic, Sidik Salkic, Smajl Ibrahimovic, Juso Delic and Dino Salihovic. 
The footage was first shown at the trial of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic at the UN war crimes tribunal in June 2005. Just days later, Serbian police arrested the five Scorpions. Carla del Ponte, the tribunal's chief prosecutor, has frequently been critical of Belgrade, but on this occasion she praised the Serbian authorities, saying they had carried out a brilliant operation. 
The trial in Belgrade started in late 2005. Serbian War Crimes Prosecution spokesman Bruno Vekaric described it as a very important case that would "clearly distance the Serbian society and judiciary from the crimes committed in Srebrenica in 1995". 
The only one to plead guilty was Pero Petrasevic, who was sentenced to 13 years in prison Tuesday. The other defendants claimed that the footage of the killing was not the original tape, and demanded that it be removed from the list of evidence. 
Slobodan Medic and Branislav Medic received the maximum prison sentence of 20 years. Aleksandar Medic, charged with assisting in the crime, was sentenced to five years. 
Another Scorpions member seen in the recording, Slobodan Davidovic, is in jail in Croatia, where he was arrested. 
Explaining the verdict, Judge Gordana Bozilovic-Petrovic said that it had been proven that unit commander Slobodan Medic had ordered the others to commit a war crime against civilians. Medic also ordered the taping of the execution as a "memento", the judge said. 
After the verdict was announced, war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic said that he was only "partly" satisfied, adding that he would appeal to the Serbian Supreme Court. 
"It is not easy to reach a verdict for such a war crime," Vukcevic told reporters. At the same time, he praised "the efficiency of the process". 
The representative of the victims' families, Natasa Kandic, said the verdict "has not brought the victims justice". During the trial, Kandic claimed that the Scorpions had been under the jurisdiction of the Serbian police, while the court ruled that the unit had mostly operated as part of the so-called Army of the Serbs from Croatia. 
It remained unclear how the Scorpions had come to hold the six Bosniaks captive, Kandic said. 
Members of the victims' families were appalled that some indictees received short sentences or, in Vukov's case, no sentence at all. "They killed children, yet one of them was acquitted and one was sentenced to five years in prison. Where else in the world can you see such a thing? I am not satisfied and I never will be," said Nura Alispahic, the mother of one victim. 
Safeta Muhic, sister of victim Safet Fejzic, described the verdict as "immensely shameful for both the court and the state (of Serbia)". 
The case now goes to the Supreme Court, which can confirm the verdict, modify it, or order a retrial. 
