14/03/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 14/03/06
On Sunday (12 March), Serbian President Boris Tadic, Democratic Party officials and thousands of citizens paid tribute to the late Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic on the third anniversary of his assassination. Tadic joined members of Djindjic's family, friends and political associates, placing flowers on his grave and lighting candles. Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica also commemorated Djindjic's death during a ceremony at the site of the shooting. 
Djindjic was shot dead three years ago in front of the Serbian government building, just weeks after a previous attempt on his life. Former police Special Operations commander Milorad Ulemek and members of the Zemun Clan -- an organised crime gang -- are being tried for his murder. 
The memorial assembly, called "See You in The Future," was held at the Sava Centre in Belgrade. A brief documentary covering Djindjic's political career was screened, and visitors were shown footage from the assassination. 
Although those believed to have been directly involved in the shooting are behind bars, investigators have yet to determine who may have ordered and financed the plot. 
The Zemun Clan has been linked to the Milosevic regime and to attacks on its political opponents. After Ulemek turned himself in to authorities on 2 May 2004, hopes were high that the full truth would be revealed. Buoying those hopes further, a key member of the Zemun Clan, Dejan Milenkovic, was arrested in Thessaloniki on 16 July 2004. 
However, Ulemek denies any involvement in the assassination, insisting that he is being used as a scapegoat. Appearing before the Belgrade Special Court, Milenkovic simply claimed to "know a lot" about the murder, adding that he would talk about it "when the time comes". Powerful people were connected, he suggested, while refusing to elaborate. 
Djindjic associates, such as Vladimir Popovic, have accused powerful forces in the country, including factions of the Serbian Army, the Orthodox Church and the Academy of Sciences and Arts, of being behind the murder. Even Kostunica, who clashed frequently with Djindjic during his final years, has come under accusations. The Belgrade prosecutor's office has questioned several people cited by Popovic, but officials -- including former Serbian Interior Minister Dusan Mihajlovic -- say the allegations are unsubstantiated by police findings. 
"There were no outside financiers or organisers," says journalist Milos Vasic, author of a book on the assassination. However, he adds, it is likely that the killers had links to a wide network of organised crime groups across Southeast Europe. 
The court is now awaiting the results of an analysis from the Criminological Institute in Wiesbaden, Germany. It also has yet to decide on a motion by the defence for a reconstruction of the crime to be performed. 
After that, Deputy Special Prosecutor Jovan Prijic, the defence and the accused will present their final statements. 
