29/04/2013
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 29/04/13
NGOs in the region are advocating new laws to guarantee rights and benefits to veterans, more than 15 years after the conflicts in the region. 
Since Yugoslavia's six republics went their separate ways, veterans groups across the Balkans say former fighters are facing a common set of problems, many of which are the result of untreated post-traumatic stress disorder. 
When Yugoslavia broke apart in the early 1990s, Serbia took control over the Yugoslavia National Army. The exact number of those who fought in the army was never known. Veterans associations say the number is larger than the state estimate of around 500,000. 
"According to our estimations, around 700,000 people fought in [the Yugoslavia Army]. Veterans are the second-biggest category of population after the pensioners. We have no pensions and no help, the state does not even accept that we fought after 1992, because officially Serbia was at war only in 1991-1992," Mile Milosevic, president of the Association of War Veterans of Serbia, told SETimes. 
Milosevic added that most of the war veterans never got any help form the state. About 8,500 servicemen from the 1999 conflict in Kosovo have sued Serbia in the Court for Human Rights in Strasbourg in an effort to collect daily wages that were promised, but never given. The court is expected to issue a ruling on May 15th. 
In Serbia, the groups are asking the government to count one year of service as two years in the employment register for all veterans, a benefit presently extended only to those who were professional soldiers. They also seek elimination of administrative barriers, especially in health protection. 
The only categories Serbia defines for the purposes of paying benefits are "war victims" and "war-disabled combatants." While professional soldiers who were part of Serbia's standing army receive benefits toward their pension, about 400,000 citizens who were deployed during the war do not. 
The Serbian government does not have specialised institutions to work with veterans who seek help. Since its formation in 1999, the NGO War Trauma Centre is among the few organisations and institutions in Serbia that offers counseling, support groups and workshops for veterans. 
Branislava Stevic, executive director of the War Trauma Centre, said that around 8.8 percent of Serbian veterans have post-traumatic stress disorder, an illness that often leads to violence, addiction and suicide. 
"So far, around 5,000 people passed through our centre seeking help. At any moment we have 30 people waiting for some kind of help, advice or support," Stevic told SETimes. 
"Veterans support groups and counseling are aimed to lower the percentage of family violence, mitigating effects of traumatic experiences, easing integrations and inclusion of veterans and reduce prejudices between veterans and rest of the society," Stevic said. 
According to Stevic, the most significant problems veterans face are depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, alcoholism, lack of self-esteem and an inability to find employment. 
There is only one department in the Serbian government that deals with veterans issues, in the ministry of labour, employment and social policy, however its support is limited only to the war-disabled and families of fighters who were killed in combat. 
Negovan Stankovic, state secretary in the ministry of labour, said Serbia is trying to find solutions that can fit requirements of all people who participated in the war. 
"Protection of veterans and disabled people consists of many rights and laws and they provide fees described in damages for injuries and death. At this moment, around 43,500 people in Serbia have this kind of protection and monthly allocations are around 1.25 million dinars," Stankovic said. 
War veterans in both entities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) say they feel cheated by their governments. Veterans' policy in the past 17 years was mainly implemented through social rights and benefits, such as cash benefits, housing, free land and cars. An intensified review of veterans' rights started in 2010. 
A recent audit of veterans' right in the Federation of BiH showed many forgeries of medical documentation. The number of fighters, the disabled and families of the victims almost doubled, rising from 290,000 to 550,000 in the last couple of years. The audit revealed that a significant number of local politicians and military officials receive disability benefits even though they spent the war far away from the front lines, and some of them were receiving double pension benefits from both BiH and Croatia. 
As a result of the audit's findings, 6,000 former soldiers were removed from the right to pensions or cash compensation, and others saw reductions in the amount of their compensation. 
According to data from Associations of War Veterans in the Federation of BiH and Republica Srpska, every second war veteran suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder and more than 4,000 have committed suicide since the war ended in 1995. There are no specialised institutions to assist sufferers of the disorder. 
"The state did not give us anything that we were promised," Narcis Mišanović, president of the Association of Demobilized Combatants Novi Grad, Sarajevo, told SETimes. "One small part go to work and regularly receive wages, but many of those who work do not receive a salary and most veterans and their families go to the public kitchen." 
Kosovo Liberation Army veterans did not receive institutional care because the country was administered by the UN, which showed a neutral position toward those involved in the war. 
The struggle of Kosovo veterans started a few months after the end of the war, when the Kosovo Liberation Army was demobilised and transformed into the Kosovo Protection Corps, leaving 15,000 combatants out of the new group. 
"At the time, authorities had promised them to incorporate in Kosovo police and other institutions, but no serious action followed," Muharrem Xhemajli, chairman of War Veterans Organisation of the army, told SETimes. 
This year, the government initiated a programme to provide legal status and benefits for veterans, which is scheduled to be functioning by the end of the year. 
Minor assistance to veterans has occurred, however, on a case-by-case basis. The War Veterans Organisation of the Kosovo Liberation Army lobbied the government to reconstruct houses for a dozen of veterans facing difficult situations. For some others facing extreme poverty and health problems the association provided 18,000 euros either for food or medicine in 2012. 
Stress, depression, anxiety and aggressive behavior are common symptoms among participants in the 2001 conflict in Macedonia, according to a 2009 study conducted by the Faculty for Security Studies in Skopje in conjunction with the former Association of the Security Forces Veterans, now a political party Dostoinstvo (Dignity). 
Many Macedonian veterans admitted having problems with alcoholism, drug addiction, domestic violence, marital problems, health and financial issues. Approximately 30 members of the police and the military forces that participated in 2001 conflict have committed suicide. 
"We have ticking bombs walking on the streets in Macedonia and the state doesn't take this seriously until a tragedy occurs," Stojanche Angelov, leader of Dostoinstvo and a veteran of the 2001 conflict, told SETimes. "War veterans pick up guns easier and they know how to use [them], so one must always keep this in mind." 
Correspondents Safet Kabashaj in Pristina, Ana Lovakovic in Sarajevo and Biljana Lajmanovska in Skopje contributed to this report. 
What actions need to be taken to help veterans of the conflicts? Tell us your thoughts in the comment section. 
