09/08/2007
(AFP, Euronews, B92 - 09/08/07; Reuters, AP, DPA, VOA, HINA, Makfax, Beta, B92, Balkan Investigative Reporting Network - 08/08/07; RFE/RL - 07/08/07)
Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku issued a stern warning on Wednesday (August 8th) that Pristina may pull out of upcoming talks with Belgrade, in the event it is asked to accept anything less than independence, or to agree to the province's division along ethnic lines. 
"Any proposal other than Kosovo's independence is unacceptable," he said, warning also that any offer to divide the province's along ethnic lines could force Pristina to walk out of the negotiations. 
"At any time such a proposal is tabled we will reconsider our position and our participation in this process. If we start redrawing boundaries who's to say where it will all stop," Ceku said after meeting with Admiral Harry Ulrich, commander of NATO's Naples-based Joint Force Command, to discuss security issues and the process of resolving Kosovo's status. 
The new negotiations will be held under the aegis of the six-nation Contact Group, comprised of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, which has tasked three diplomats -- US envoy for Kosovo Frank Wisner, Russia's Alexander Botsan-Kharchenko and Germany's Wolfgang Ischinger, representing the EU -- with mediating the process. 
Wisner was closely involved in the more than yearlong and largely fruitless UN-led talks on Kosovo's future that ended in March. Last week, he ruled out the province's partition as an option. 
 "The Contact Group has laid down as a fundamental guiding principle ... no division of Kosovo," he told Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty in an interview. "We have never changed that view, we think it is a very bad idea and we will continue to oppose it." 
The new round of talks is set to kick off Friday, when the Contact Group troika will arrive in Belgrade to meet with Serbia's leadership and then proceed with a similar mission to Pristina on Saturday. 
Ahead of that trip, the mediators are meeting in London with representatives of the six nations comprising the Contact Group on Thursday to discuss aspects of the process. 
 "It's an introductory meeting," a British foreign office official has said. "The purpose is to establish a framework for how they are going to proceed, and to discuss travel plans." 
The Kosovo status process was handed back to the Contact Group last month, after Western nations shelved a draft UN Security Council resolution on Kosovo amid Russian threats of a veto. 
The Kosovo Albanians, who comprise 90% of the province's population of 2 million people, have accepted the blueprint, although they would not get the outright independence from Serbia they were seeking. 
 But setbacks and the delays in the process have fuelled frustration among Kosovo's majority. A senior Kosovo Albanian political leader warned on Wednesday about mounting tension in the province and possible street protests. 
"We have to be aware that fear is building among the people," Reuters quoted Veton Surroi, the leader of the ORA party, as telling the Kosovo daily Express. "The people of Kosovo have a right to put pressure on their institutions. There is a feeling they have sacrificed everything for the sake of Kosovo's status. Not just the (1998-1999) war, the burning and destruction, but everything they have sacrificed over the past eight years ... simply to have a status solution." 
