14/09/2005
(OHR Morning Media Brief - 14/09/05; FENA, SRNA, OHR - 13/09/05)
Early on Wednesday (14 September), the Republika Srpska National Assembly (RSNA) rejected an agreement on police reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), a key final condition the country must meet to advance on its European integration path. 
In a 56-10 vote held after midnight, Bosnian Serb lawmakers decided to back the RS government's stance rejecting the police reform deal "proposed by BiH Council of Ministers Chair Adnan Terzic". 
Representatives of the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) and of the Social Democratic Party reportedly supported the agreement. During the debate, Tarik Sadovic of the SDA said he opposed the proposed decision describing the deal as Terzic's proposal. Instead, he said, the RSNA should tell the citizens that what it is rejecting is not Terzic's agreement, but the launch of BiH's negotiations with the EU. 
The lawmakers also voted to task the RS government with resuming talks on police reform on the basis of the conclusions approved on 30 May, stating that any model of police organisation in BiH in which local areas would cross the inter-entity boundary line was unacceptable, FENA reported. 
That position, however, conflicts with three conditions set out by the EU: securing exclusive state-level police competencies, elimination of political interference from the police, and ensuring that police regions are determined on the basis of technical and professional criteria -- thus allowing police to cross boundaries separating the two entities in the execution of their duties. 
The EU has repeatedly said that these principles are non-negotiable. In an interview with the daily Oslobodjenje on Tuesday, British Ambassador to BiH Matthew Rycroft -- whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency -- said Brussels has already made major concessions by "postponing the deadline for implementing the reform or by accepting that the final map of police regions doesn't have to be agreed on right now." 
"In turn, we did not see RS make any concessions. The three EC principles will not be changed. They have to be met. If they are not, there will be no police reform and there will be no progress on the way to Europe," he said. 
On Monday, the EU signalled that SAA talks could be launched right away once the police reform agreement is signed by the BiH federal government and the two entities. 
But unless an agreement is reached by 15 September, High Representative Paddy Ashdown warned last week, BiH is unlikely to get the green light for opening SAA talks before the end of this year. If that happens, he said, RS and the Serb Democratic Party, which plays a leading role in the entity's government, would be considered responsible for blocking the process and could face sanctions. 
Quoting public opinion surveys, Office of the High Representative spokesman Mario Brkic said Tuesday that more than 80 per cent of BiH's citizens want their country to join the EU. "They are expecting their political representatives to deliver this," he said, noting also that a move to reject the agreement on police reform at a time when many EU citizens are questioning the merits of further enlargement would send "an extremely negative signal". 
