09/06/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 09/06/06
Croatia carved out its third World Cup appearance in a row by winning Group 8, which included Bulgaria, Hungary, Iceland, Malta and Sweden. In ten qualification matches, Croatia won seven times, with no losses, taking first place ahead of Sweden. 
Coach Zlatko Kranjcar is leading a team made up of players who earn their living outside Croatia, at various European football leagues. The defence, which includes Robert Kovac, Stjepan Tomas, Anthony Seric, Dario Simic, MarioTokic and Josip Simunic, put in a strong performance in the qualification phase. As the preparation matches have shown, however, it is not rock solid. 
The team has half dozen players with excellent offensive skills. The strongest among them is star striker Dado Prso, Croatia's five-goal top scorer in the Group 8 campaign. Alongside him are Ivan Klasnic, of the Bundesliga team Werder Bremen, as well as Ivan Bosnjak and the swift-footed Ivica Olic. The offence also includes one of the best strikers of the Belgian league, Bosko Balaban, celebrated for his free kicks. 
The Croatian goalkeepers are Tomislav Butina, Joey Didulica and Stipe Pletikosa, who will be first goalkeeper. 
When it comes to the midfield, Ivan and Jerko Leko, Niko Kovac, Igor Tudor and Marko Babic provide a genuine attack threat. Darijo Srna has great breakthrough ability and has scored four goals in the qualifications. Then there are Jurica Vranjes and rising stars Luka Modric and Niko Kranjcar. Some think the 21-year-old Kranjcar, son of the team's coach, could be the key player. Introduced amid some scepticism, he has already proved his mettle. 
The general consensus is that these young players will set the tone for the whole team. They will be under pressure to live up to the example set by their forerunners, including the storied 1998 run to the semifinals -- which included a 3-0 win over Germany 
Croatia's toughest match could be its first -- against Cup favourites Brazil on 13 June. Because the odds are so heavily stacked, though, the match may be less of a worry than the following ones against Australia and Japan. Both of those teams have already shown their presence in the tournament is no fluke. Beating them will be crucial. 
The Croatian team will be buoyed by a large number of fans, including a large bloc of Croatian emigrants to Germany and elsewhere, as well as organised supporters' groups from Croatian league clubs. Expectations are high, with many hoping the squad will make it into the final eight. Anything less is bound to disappoint. 
