02/05/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 02/05/06
With political relations between Albania and Serbia improving in recent years, business and the arts have been taking on the role of boosting ties among people in the two countries. 
One example of that occurred recently when the National Theatre of Serbia performed Nikolai Gogol's comic masterpiece, "Marriage," before audiences in Tirana. It was a reciprocal visit, following up on the Albanian National Theatre's (ANT) performance of Chekhov's "The Seagull" in Belgrade last October. 
"One of our famous writers in the beginning of 1990s wrote that the history goes fast. This is true and I am very happy that within several months, we are breaking the 60-year distance between the Albanian and Serb theatres," the artistic director of NTS, Bozidar Durovic, told journalists in Tirana. "Art is the best way to overcome all the barriers and obstacles," he said. 
The Serb cast also paid a visit to the cities of Berat and Kruja "in order to get a taste of Albania," said ANT director Kico Londo. "This is a great opportunity to know each other," he said. 
Gogol's play is a hilarious take on the subject of engagement and marriage, involving five suitors, a desperate bride and only slightly less desperate aunt, and a pushy matchmaker. Although they performed in Serbian, the actors were able to transcend the language barrier and make the Tirana audience laugh. The cast included Nada Sargan, Sonja Knezevic, Nada Blam, Mihajlo Ladevac and Vladan Gajovic. Slavenko Saletovic directed the production. 
"The Serb troupe acted the ironic comedy with love, going directly to the hearts of every member of the public," an Albanian daily said after the performance. 
Representatives of the Serbian Ministry of Culture attended the Serb troupe's performance and praised the co-operation with Albanian institutions. "We think this is only the beginning of the co-operation between both countries. Knowing that there are many doors open for us to Albania, I would like to thank you for the pleasant hospitality," said Miriana Buric, of the Serbian Culture Ministry. 
