22/10/2007
By Jonilda Koci, Natasa Radic and Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times – 22/10/07
NATO has its eye on opening its door to new members next year, with invitations expected at the April summit in Bucharest. First in line are the Adriatic Charter signatory countries -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia. While all three have been given encouraging signals, they have also been warned that work remains to be done. Each country faces a set of challenges that must be addressed by next spring. 
With the major defence-related criteria already met, the sticking points lie in such areas as political and judicial reform. NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said as much during a recent speech to the NATO Parliamentary Assembly. "As in previous rounds of enlargement, the Bucharest decision will ultimately be a political one," he told the lawmakers. 
 For Albania, two main challenges are on the table: improving political co-operation and fighting corruption. The country must show that the political system has matured after a long, and often troubled, transition to democracy. For example, election problems have drawn a great deal of international attention. Following the most recent local election, on February 18th, both NATO and the EU noted some positive changes -- open debate in the media, high voter turnout, and higher standards for election campaigns. 
On the other hand, international observers said the vote was a missed opportunity for political parties to work together. Lack of co-operation was again a problem over the summer, when the election of a president was stalled due to bitter fighting between the government and the opposition. Better dialogue is a prerequisite for other reforms, because many key changes require commitment across the political spectrum. 
 "Co-operation between the government and opposition in implementing reform is a key element for success," Assistant Secretary General for Defence Policy and Planning John Colston said at a NATO conference in March in Tirana. 
Albania must also convince the international community that it is mounting an effective fight against corruption. Progress has been slow in this area, as Transparency International's annual Corruption Perception Index notes. Although the country moved up six notches in this year's index, from 111th t 105th, it still lags behind the rest of the region. NATO and EU officials have taken note of government initiatives in this area, but warn concrete results are still missing. 
 In terms of meeting the defence criteria, Albania is on track. With the help of the international community, authorities are continuing to restructure the armed forces and strengthen democratic structures pursuant to its NATO Membership Action Plan (MAP). The army is being transformed into a smaller, voluntary and professional force. Excess amounts of weaponry and ammunition -- which have posed a significant public hazard and proliferation risk -- are being cut back. 
Albania recently became the first nation in the world to complete destruction of declared chemical weapons holdings under the Chemical Weapons Convention in July. It has also contributed with troops to the US-led missions in Afghanistan and Iraq. Since February, the country has had 120 non-combat troops, stationed at Mosul Airport. Albanian Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu said Albanian troops would stay in Iraq as long as US forces remain there. 
Pressing their country's case for NATO membership, Albanian officials cite the key role of Western Balkan states in ensuring regional stability. "Acceptance of Albania, Croatia and Macedonia in NATO would create a more secure and sustainable southeast branch of NATO," Prime Minister Sali Berisha has said. 
Croatia: rallying public support  
Of the three Adriatic Charter countries, Croatia is arguably the farthest along in terms of meeting the NATO criteria. However, Croatia faces a different problem: rallying public support behind membership in the Alliance. Croatia presented its 6th MAP to NATO leadership in Brussels at the end of September. After the meeting, Assistant Foreign Minister Pjer Simonovic said Zagreb is confident this MAP will be the last. 
The Croatian Army has been completely transformed and brought into line with NATO regulations. Croatia actively participates in the Afghanistan mission with a contingent of 200 soldiers, which will be expanded by 100 next year. In terms of political reforms, Croatia has been receiving good signals from the Alliance. 
All the political parties have endorsed membership in NATO as a top priority, second only to EU membership. However, the public does not share their enthusiasm. If a binding referendum were held today, Croatia might end up not joining. The most recent polls show an even split -- 50% for, and 50% against. In fact, the government does not plan to hold a referendum, as none is required under the constitution. 
The public scepticism is driven by two main issues. Firstly, Croats are worried that military bases will be built on the Adriatic coast, even though NATO officials have explicitly ruled this out on several occasions. 

A second problem is opposition to Croatia participating in the Iraq war, even as part of a NATO-led mission. Politicians and diplomats have tried to explain that NATO does not influence national sovereignty and such decisions can only be made by parliament. 
 Despite the shaky public support, Croatia looks set to enter the Alliance during its next enlargement wave. "We are waiting for you in NATO," US President George W. Bush told his Croatian counterpart, Stipe Mesic, at the most recent UN session in New York. 
A NATO delegation will visit Croatia in November to make sure that all the requirements are being met and that there are no remaining obstacles. Their report will be presented to NATO ministers, who will then decide if they want to give the go-ahead. 
Macedonia impresses with military reform  
In Macedonia, public support is not a problem. Surveys have found more than 70% currently favour joining NATO, largely because many believe membership will bring stability and peace. This is a high priority for the country, given its location in an uneasy neighbourhood and its own period of conflict six years ago. 
Defence reform has been Macedonia's strong suit. It has completely reorganised its military, and many would say that had reform of the army been the only condition for membership. Macedonia would have become a member long ago. 
In September, NATO Military Committee Chairman Ray Henault said in Skopje that he was impressed by the military reforms. The Macedonian Army is a small in size, flexible, well-trained and modern. It has implemented seven MAPs and has a completely interoperable and compatible command structure. The army has been professionalized completely -- that is, there has been no conscription for three years. 
The army contributes to the ISAF mission in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom in Iraq, and has participated in the EU's Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina since last year. Macedonian soldiers are now also being trained for UN peacekeeping missions. 
 Right now, the biggest obstacle to NATO membership is the poor state of dialogue between the ruling party and opposition. Cohabitation between the president and prime minister, who come from different parties and whose duties overlap in some areas, has also been a problem. Furthermore, major judicial reforms -- such as the law on public prosecution and the establishment of a Judicial Council -- remain unfinished. 
Nevertheless, most domestic observers are optimistic about getting an invitation next April in Bucharest. Given the unpredictable outcome of the Kosovo status process, many believe that NATO would like to bolster stability in the region by bringing Macedonia into the fold. 
The prospect of membership would certainly discourage most radical groups. It would ensure that Macedonians can turn their full attention to improving living standards, without the worry of future unrest. 
