10/02/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 10/02/05
UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte has proposed that the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) transfer the trial of three former Yugoslav Army generals either to Croatia or Serbia-Montenegro. 
"She signed the document last night and it was filed this morning," del Ponte's spokeswoman, Florence Hartmann, said Wednesday (9 February), announcing the prosecutor's request. 
The three officers -- Veselin Sljivancanin, Mile Radic and Mile Mrksic -- face charges of crimes against humanity and violation of the laws and customs of war, stemming from their alleged roles in the 1991 Vukovar massacre. More than 250 civilians were abducted from a local hospital, then bussed to a nearby farm and killed. 
 Seventeen men involved in the massacre are already standing trial in Serbia. But Croatia has also claimed jurisdiction over the case, since the crimes were committed on its territory. 
It is now up to tribunal President Theodor Meron and the trial chamber to decide where the trial should take place, or whether it should be transferred at all. The judges have turned down previous requests by del Ponte to have war crimes cases moved to local courts. 
In Zagreb, Justice Minister Vesna Skare-Ozbolt said Croatian authorities "will provide all necessary arguments" to ensure that Croatia gets the case. 
"The decision is up to the judges, but Croatia's judiciary is ready for the case to be transferred here," Skare-Ozbolt told the HINA news agency. Serbian President Boris Tadic, however, issued a statement calling for the trial to take place in Serbia. 
"The case should be referred to the Special War Crimes Court in Belgrade, whose professionalism and objectivity have been praised by international institutions," Tadic said in a statement. While the Serbia-Montenegro Constitution permits citizens to be extradited to the UN court, it does not allow extraditions to a foreign country, argued Bruno Vekaric, a spokesman for the prosecution at the Belgrade court. 
Prosecutors from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro have agreed that domestic courts are mature enough to take over cases from The Hague, and that doing so would help promote reconciliation in the region. But they continue to differ over jurisdiction in specific cases. 
At the same time, Serbian and Croatian war crimes prosecutors have signed a co-operation treaty that will enable them to work more closely in solving war and organised crime cases. "This treaty will make state boundaries disappear when it comes to chasing war criminals, drug smugglers and traffickers," said Croatian State Prosecutor Mladen Bajic. 
Serbian war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic said Belgrade expects to sign a similar treaty with BiH soon, while Bajic said his country plans to sign agreements with Macedonia and Montenegro. 
