04/08/2006
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 04/08/06
Scores of recent media reports have highlighted an ongoing phenomenon in Romania. Thousands of Romanians are flocking to Bulgarian seaside resorts, turning their sun-screened backs on their own coasts. 
Although the official tourist season started over two months ago, hotels on the Romanian coast are only half full, and tourism operators anticipate an even lower rate of occupancy for the remaining two months. According to the National Association of Tourism Agencies (ANAT), the main operators in this sector sustained losses between 10 per cent and 25 per cent so far this summer. 
 Low quality services, panic over bird flu, flooding, and a beach licensing scandal have all contributed to this negative trend. Ovidiu Iuliu Marian, head of the National Tourism Agency, resigned this week in frustration. 
Meanwhile, the Romanian daily Cotidianul cites ANAT officials as saying the number of Romanian tourists choosing to spend their holidays on the Bulgarian seaside this year has increased six to eight times more than last year. The number of vacationers heading to the neighbouring country's beaches each weekend is about 1,500, as opposed to last year's average of 150. 
According to Evenimentul Zilei, tourism is only expected to generate 1.9 per cent of the GDP for Romania this year -- a big drop from the 4.8 per cent it generated in 2005. Tourism income in Bulgaria amounts to 16 per cent of GDP. 
All-inclusive packages, said to be favoured by some 60 per cent of international tourists, have yet to be implemented in Romania. Furthermore, the country doesn't hold any tourist events until 15 June, while Bulgaria and Turkey begin the season on 10 May. 
"Romanian tourism is in a plight," ANAT said in a letter to President Traian Basescu and Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu. An alarm also has been sounded by major international organisations such as the World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC). According to a WTTC report, Romania currently ranks 162th -- out of 170 countries -- when it comes to tourism. 
Despite the numbers, officials are upbeat about the future. Plans on paper show that for the next ten years, this sector will bring increasingly more money to the state budget -- with an average annual rate assessed at around 6.2 per cent. The tangible perspective of EU integration may be the helping hand Romania needs. Until then, though, major natural landmarks and uniquely preserved ancestral traditions remain the victims of a flawed marketing system. 
