29/08/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 29/08/08
With the reconfiguration of UNMIK, the mission no longer has decision-making powers in the newly independent state, UNMIK spokesman Alexander Ivanko said in Pristina on Wednesday (August 27th). "UNMIK has not been in a position to impose agreements or solutions since June 15th," he said. 
The mission's current role is to encourage dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. UNMIK would like them to hold direct talks without facilitators, which would focus on the sectors set by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. 
 Ivanko is confident that such dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade could be fostered with UNMIK monitoring. "We have a dialogue through a third party between Pristina and Belgrade, the third party being the chief of UNMIK, and that is already a positive step," he said. 
UNMIK wants to start such direct talks immediately. "Actually, from our perspective, it would have been very helpful if such a meeting was held yesterday, but because of the position of the government of Serbia, such a meeting was not feasible," Ivanko said. 
Last week, UNMIK chief Lamberto Zannier met with Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and briefed him on the current, facilitated talks, in which Zannier is the third party. "The next plan is for the chief of UNMIK to meet with [Serbian Minister for Kosovo] Goran Bogdanovic … in September," Ivanko said. 
Last month, Kosovo officials said they were ready for negotiations with Belgrade, but Serbia refused. "Pristina is ready to engage in practical talks with Belgrade on a wide range of issues," Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni said in late July. "We are ready to talk directly to Belgrade." 
The same officials, though, reiterate Kosovo's independence will not be on the agenda. "The independence of Kosovo is not negotiable, and it can never be negotiated again," Hyseni said. 
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic says Belgrade will not talk with Pristina. "We are not prepared to engage in discussions with the secessionist provisional authorities of Kosovo," he said. However, Belgrade will discuss Kosovo with Ban, Zannier, and other UN officials. 
Kosovo declared independence in February. The state currently has diplomatic relations with 46 countries. Serbia and its Russian ally continue to view Kosovo as a Serbian province. 
