27/04/2009
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 27/04/09
With the spread of the international crisis, Albania is facing a difficult economic situation in 2009. The IMF forecasts zero or minimal economic growth this year. "Right now we are looking at a [growth] number between 0 and 1%", said Gerwin Bell, former IMF mission chief in Albania, during an April 7th press conference in Tirana. 
The IMF is closely watching Albania's economy even though the country closed its assistance agreement with the Fund last January. 
The government, however, sticks to its predictions of 6% GDP growth in 2009. As the June 28th elections draw near, it is promoting voter-friendly proposals to increase wages by 15% in the public administration, health and education sectors, and increase pensions by 10 to 20%. 
 It plans to enact these measures on May 1st, ignoring IMF and central bank warnings against overspending. 
 The IMF considers the plan unaffordable. It has advised the government not to increase salaries and pensions. 
Moreover, the central bank -- the Bank of Albania -- has warned that the economy is decelerating and threatens revenue collection. In a recent report, the central bank urged precautionary measures. "The government should delay discretionary expenditures ... that are not contracted or finished yet," said Bank Governor Ardian Fullani. 
Tirana insists it has the funds it needs. Finance Minister Ridvan Bode said the budget has large contingency funds and the government had accrued 260m euros from privatisation last year. It is also seeking a loan of 250m to 350m euros from foreign banks. He said the government wants to "boost consumption" to deal with the problems created by the global crisis. 
 Experts have been noticing worrisome economic symptoms. Albanian diaspora remittances decreased 27% in 2008 from the previous year. Most Albanian emigrants live in Italy and Greece, where they too are feeling the recession. 
In addition, the Albanian lek has depreciated against major currencies, and exports fell by 15% in February year-on-year, according to the Albanian Institute of Statistics. 
The banking sector has suffered too, recording only a 2% year-on-year increase in deposits in 2008 after a gain of 20% in 2007. 
Foreign economists and opposition politicians say the government needs to acknowledge the crisis and launch new measures. Some of the critics imply the government is playing to voters before the June election. A tardy reaction would have the biggest impact on "the economy and the people's well-being", said Shkeqim Cani, former governor of the Bank of Albania. 
