14/03/2006
(Reuters, Sofia News Agency, BTA, BNN, Focus News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik, Vseki Den, Bulgarian Government - 13/03/06)
Weeks before the European Commission (EC) is due to publish a crunch report on Bulgaria's preparedness for EU membership, a senior Brussels official urged Sofia on Monday (13 March) to step up efforts in dealing with issues of serious concern for the Union. 
"The EC does find certain progress in Bulgaria following the October monitoring report, but there are still areas raising serious concerns," said EC Director General for Enlargement Michael Leigh. 
In its annual assessment of Bulgaria's accession progress, released in October, the EC said that if the country wants to join the EU in January 2007, as planned, it must address immediately problems in the fields of competition, services, agriculture, regional policy, and justice and home affairs. 
The next monitoring report, due on 17 May, will include the findings of recent peer reviews in red-flagged areas. It will also recommend whether Bulgaria should enter the EU on 1 January, or see its entry postponed by a year under a safeguard clause. 
EU leaders will make a decision in June, based on the report. 
The EC wants to see real, tangible progress in the implementation of judicial reform, in improving the efficiency of the judicial system and in the fight against organised crime and corruption, Leigh said after his meeting with European Affairs Minister Meglena Kuneva. 
In talks with Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev, the EC official praised Sofia for positive steps taken since November, including the adoption of a number of new laws and the appointment of a new chief prosecutor. 
However, he said, legislative changes are needed to ensure judicial independence, efficiency and accountability. Leigh also voiced concern over the country's capacity to absorb resources from the European funds that it is set to receive in the future. 
Meanwhile, Bulgarian Chief Prosecutor Boris Velchev and the justice and interior ministers, Georgi Petkanov and Rumen Petkov, met with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn in Brussels on Monday, seeking to convince him that the country is taking adequate measures to meet its commitments in the area of fighting organised crime and corruption. 
Velchev, who assumed his post less than a month ago, briefed Rehn about planned structural changes in the prosecution, pledging also that charges against key underworld bosses would be filed within days. 
About 150 people have been killed in Bulgaria since 2001 in a string of bombings and contract murders, with no convictions to date. 
