01/10/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 01/10/04
US Undersecretary of State Marc Grossman told top Serbia-Montenegro officials in Belgrade that the state is already suffering due to insufficient co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). He said Serbia-Montenegro's inclusion in Euro-Atlantic integration processes depends on the fulfillment of its international obligations. 
Grossman insisted that General Ratko Mladic and four other army and police generals must be extradited to the ICTY as soon as possible. Mladic is indicted for the 1995 murders of several thousand Muslims in Srebrenica, Bosnia and Herzegovina. The four generals are charged with war crimes against Kosovo Albanians in 1999. 
In Belgrade on Thursday (30 September), Grossman spoke with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, Serbian President Boris Tadic, Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic and Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic. Grossman said he still believes Washington could support the trial of the four generals being held in Serbia, but that before that could happen, the four must report to The Hague. He added that the arrest and extradition of Mladic is absolutely necessary. 
Grossman welcomed the issuing of an arrest warrant for the four generals as "a positive turn", adding, "Now the key thing is to arrest them and send them to The Hague." The ICTY has indicted former police generals Vlastimir Djordjevic and Sreten Lukic, and former army generals Nebojsa Pavkovic and Vladimir Lazarevic. Lukic, Pavkovic and Lazarevic are believed to be available to the Serbian authorities. Djordjevic fled Serbia immediately after the change of power in October 2000, leaving Serbian authorities unsure of his whereabouts. The other three could be extradited to the ICTY after a brief procedure, but the Serbian government must first agree to that. 
Asked whether he believes Serbian authorities are doing everything in their power to locate and arrest Mladic, Grossman replied, "Much more has to be done, because Mladic must be arrested. He must go to The Hague and all efforts must be put into the realisation of that task." Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic said that the possibility of Mladic being in Belgrade is checked on a daily basis. 
Serbia-Montenegro officials assured Grossman they are determined to have Serbia fulfil all its international obligations. Top state officials are due to debate co-operation with the ICTY next week. Kostunica noted however that "the country's stability must be taken into account" when fulfilling those obligations. "Two-way co-operation is a model that would definitely contribute to a more efficient fulfillment of international obligations," Kostunica said. 

