16/03/2007
(AFP, DPA, AP, Reuters, EurActiv, Office of the High Representative, European Parliament - 15/03/07; AP, European Commission - 14/03/07)
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) progress in meeting the requirements for building closer ties with the EU was the main issue on EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn's agenda as he headed to Sarajevo for talks Friday (March 16th) with politicians and international officials. Ahead of his trip, Rehn told the European Parliament that "2006 was not a year of success" for BiH. 
"As a result of an extended election campaign, the reform agenda stagnated and the political climate turned sour, leading to nationalist rhetoric and tensions. We've had enough of it," the commissioner warned. 
He said the EU would not sign a Stablisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the country until concrete progress was made on two key conditions: police reform and co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. 
In December, BiH completed the technical talks on the SAA, considered an important first step on the road to EU membership. But the country has been unable so far to meet the requirement to restructure its police forces according to European standards. 
Brussels has outlined three specific principles for police reform. All legislative and budgetary competencies for all police matters must be vested at the state level. Political interference in the operational work of police must be eliminated. Finally, functional local police areas must be determined by technical policing criteria. 
Although BiH politicians reached a general agreement on police reform in late 2005, they still are at odds over the actual implementation. While the leaders of the Bosniak and Croat parties generally support the unification of the country's divided police forces, the Bosnian Serb politicians insist they can only agree to a partial merger, and oppose moves to allow police to cross entity borders. On Wednesday, another round of political talks on the issue ended without result. 
Earlier this year, the Office of the High Representative (OHR) set March 2nd as the deadline for an agreement on police reform. 
"If no progress is made in the coming days and weeks, BiH will suffer significant delays in its effort to establish closer ties with the European Union," Ljiljana Radetic, spokesperson for the OHR's office in Banja Luka said on Thursday, noting that BiH would thus fall behind other countries in the region. 
