29/11/2005
(EurActiv, FT - 29/11/05; EU, AFP, AP, Reuters, BBC, VOA, EUpolitix, EU Observer - 28/11/05)
At the end of a two-day summit in Barcelona, EU nations and their southern Mediterranean neighbours reached a compromise Monday (28 November) on a joint code of conduct to counter terrorism. They failed, however, to agree on a definition of the term. The move is expected to bring about better co-operation in the area of law enforcement across the Euro-Mediterranean region. 
"The fact that we got the practical agreement on the code of conduct from everybody is a very significant step forward indeed," said British Prime Minister Tony Blair, who co-chaired the summit with Spanish counterpart Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero. "I think this is very important both for the European countries, but also for our other colleagues around the table. It's as strong a statement as you can possibly have on the unified determination to fight terrorism in all its forms." 
The meeting was attended by top leaders from the EU, as well as by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, whose country launched accession talks with the bloc last month. Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas also participated. However, most of the countries from the southern Mediterranean shore -- including Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Syria and Tunisia -- were represented by lower-level delegations. 
The code adopted Monday denounced terrorism in all its forms and manifestations with member nations vowing to work for its eradication. 
"The threat that terrorism poses to the lives of our citizens remains serious and terrorist attacks seriously impair the enjoyment of human rights," reads the two-page document. "We remain determined to strengthen co-operation and co-ordination to respond to this global challenge. Today, we reiterate our total condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations and our determination to eradicate it and to combat its sponsors." 
The participants also confirmed their commitment to "implement in full all Security Council resolutions addressing the issue of terrorism," to try to ratify and implement all relevant UN anti-terrorism conventions and to co-operate with UN bodies dealing with the issue. 
They also pledged to "exchange information on a voluntary basis on terrorists and their support networks" and to work bilaterally "to develop our effective and operational co-operation to disrupt networks and bring individuals involved in terrorist acts to justice". 
The code was approved only after reaching a compromise. The EU agreed to cut text declaring that the right to self-determination does not justify acts of violence. The Arab delegates, meanwhile, agreed to drop their demand for language legitimising the use of force to resist foreign military occupation. 
"Terrorism can never be justified," the final document reads. "If we are to succeed in the long term in enabling international institutions, governments to stop terrorism we need to address all its causes ... We will continue to do all we can to resolve conflict, end occupation, confront oppression, reduce poverty, promote good governance and human right, improve intercultural understanding and ensure respect for all religions. Such actions serve directly the interests of the people of the EuroMed region and work against the interests of the terrorists and their networks." 
