21/09/2011
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 21/09/11
Over 50,000 exhilarated fans gathered in Skopje's Macedonia Square on Monday (September 19th) to welcome the national basketball team back from the EuroBasket championship in Lithuania. 
Five thousand fans waited for the players to arrive at the Alexander the Great Airport from where they were then transported to the square aboard a roofless double-decker bus. 
"After losing to Russia [for the bronze medal] we felt heartache, but today, when we see the welcome you prepared, we do not need a medal because you are our medal," coach Marin Dokuzovski said. 
Now among the top four in Europe, the Macedonian team has become an international sensation and the talk of media ranging from the New York Times to Croatia's Sportnet. 
With six wins over formidable opponents such as Croatia, Greece and Lithuania, the Macedonians also gave basketball powerhouses such as Russia and champion Spain a run for their money. 
Macedonian basketball legend Blagoja Georgievski spoke with SETimes about the team and the sport. 
SETimes: What were the expectations of the Macedonian team in Lithuania? 
Blagoja Georgievski: Before the tournament nobody believed in our abilities, and our preliminary results gave no promise of something special. But as the championship progressed, the team became more compact and dedicated to defence -- the main quality of our playing in this league. 
So from one victory to another, the team began to build confidence, first with Croatia, then Slovenia, Greece, Lithuania. The staff and players' motto obviously was to follow the principles of unity and collectivity and play good defence. We did not win a medal but [in effect] we won gold, given the team's success. 
 SETimes: Without a famous coach or NBA players like those of other teams, how do you explain the result? 
 Georgievski: Such a team must rely on something else and that is collectivity, team play and good defence. So, the excellent result is due to many reasons, but above all the players' collectivity as well as leaving their hearts on the floor. 
Let me not forget the presence of Lester "Bo" MacCalebb, the fantastic player who came from the Italian team Montepaski and give his best in this tournament. 
I would also add rebounding, the aggressiveness, the stolen balls -- they all marked our team's games. All of our players at the end of the tournament were listed in the groups of most caught balls, best scorer, and three-point percentage. 
Every European and world expert present in Lithuania commented on our playing, especially the team defence. Our coach, Marin Dokuzovski, has rich experience and probably his entire capacity was shown through these players. He builds strong authority among them and the success came by itself. 
 SETimes: What was crucial to building such a strong team? 
 Georgievski: The participation at the EuroBasket in Poland two years ago. Reaching ninth place then was enough to signal a potential and one that should be worked on; obviously they did work on [shaping] the game and on the team's defence. We came to this success through little money, and if more is invested, then we can expect a medal in the future. 
 SETimes: What does this success mean for the players and opportunities to play in famous European clubs? 
 Georgievski: The value of all of our players increased in Lithuania and they became a target of many managers. They were the topic of conversation in Lithuania. I speak about Antic, the Stojanovski brothers and coach Martin Dokuzovski. 
This is very important for the future because it is different when players who perform in the competitive European leagues will comprise our national team. It will contribute to our team being much stronger and having greater quality players. 
 SETimes: Will the interest in basketball increase in Macedonia? 
 Georgievski: This situation reminds me of 1970, when our then Yugoslav team became the world champion. There was no neighbourhood, school or yard where basketball was not played. People spoke only about basketball. At this moment, Macedonia opens the doors to the European and world basketball. At home, it opens the door to all children. I am sure this success will attract many to train. 
It opens the prospective for Macedonia worldwide. We are now potential candidates for the Olympics in London and will play directly in the next European Championships in Ljubljana in 2013. 
 SETimes: Can you compare basketball in former Yugoslavia to its successor states? 
 Georgievski: Yugoslav basketball was world-class. Always and everywhere we won medals. There were more quality individual players. Basketball [here] is not at that level now, but today it is team play. Spain plays with five NBA players on its team. Macedonia doesn't have one such player, but still in the first half it led by one point. We can conclude that basketball in Europe is going forward through team playing. 
