01/05/2006
(Sofia Echo - 01/05/06; Monitor - 29/04/06; AFP, BTA, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg, Vseki Den - 28/04/06)
Bulgarian Chief Prosecutor Boris Velchev asked parliament on Friday (28 April) to lift the immunity of ultranationalist politician Volen Siderov and allow an investigation to be launched against him. 
If parliament agrees, Siderov, 40, would face a probe, and possibly an indictment, on three charges -- perjury, forcing others to commit perjury, and premeditated obstruction of justice -- all stemming from a highway incident last month. 
If convicted on any of these charges, the leader of the ultranationalist Attack party could face a prison sentence of up to five years, Velchev said in his 18-page request, with 98 supportive documents attached to it. 
A demand regarding Siderov's immunity first came from Sofia district prosecutor Boyko Naidenov on Wednesday. Velchev then stressed that such a step was needed to remove a legal barrier the prosecution faced in resolving the case. 
"The request for lifting the immunity of a member of parliament does not necessarily mean the perpetration of a crime," the chief prosecutor said. "It removes a procedural obstacle so that we can do our job and check data." 
The chief prosecutor's request to parliament details the circumstances surrounding the 7 April incident on the Trakia highway, in which 22-year-old student Yavor Dokov was hit and threatened by Siderov's driver, Lyubomir Bakardzhiev. The latter also smashed the windshield of Dokov's car and punched its tyres. 
Siderov claimed he had survived "an assassination attempt" while Dokov accused Attack deputy Pavel Chernev, who looks like Bakardzhiev, of being the one who assaulted him. 
Initially, Chernev confirmed his boss's account of the event, but soon after turned against him, saying Siderov had asked him to give false testimony, so as to cover for his driver, who has a criminal record. 
Bakardzhiev later admitted his role in the incident. He also hinted that Siderov wanted him to remain behind the scenes for fear he might reveal secrets during the investigation. 
Velchev's request said Siderov had helped Bakardzhiev, who had committed an act of hooliganism, evade justice. 
The Attack leader claimed the move against him was politically motivated and an effort to undermine the party's popularity. 
"This is a political errand," Siderov said on Friday, adding that he would not voluntarily give up his immunity. 
Parliament is expected to vote on Velchev's request on 10 May. The Attack party, which has often been accused of fuelling ethnic hatred, emerged on the Bulgarian political scene months before the country's June 2005 parliamentary elections. It managed to win 21 seats in the 240-seat legislature. However, various scandals over the past months have been followed by resignations and expulsions of Attack deputies, leaving its caucus with 14 current members. 
