20/09/2010
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 20/09/10
Serbia's secret service has given the ok for parliament to adopt a law that would enable citizens or organisations to check whether they'd been the subject of spying and by whom. It will also allow them to inspect the contents of any files the secret service kept on them, including during the Milosevic era. 
The deal paves the way for placing the bill on parliament's agenda in the near future, with adoption expected by year's end. 
Passing the law is one of the conditions for moving closer to EU membership. The bill has been modelled on similar ones in Germany, Poland, Romania and Slovakia. 
An independent commission will be established to manage the process. 
"That commission should be made of people that have great moral integrity, and be representatives of independent and non-governmental organisations. Political party representatives should not be allowed to be selected," Ministry of Justice State Secretary Slobodan Homen said. 
Homen has seen his own secret file from 2003, and said it contained a great amount of incorrect information. People, he said, should be aware of their files' contents and the potential for abuse. 
Citizens will be able to learn the names of secret police collaborators who followed them, and will also be able to request the destruction of their files and be present to witness it. 
Serbian Renewal Movement (SPO) President Vuk Draskovic said many hitherto unknown crimes will be disclosed. 
"There is fear among many on the 'European train' that by opening the files they will be uncovered as collaborators of Milosevic's secret services," he said. 
Draskovic, known as an anti-communist but also a nationalist, claims that many wealthy individuals in Serbia acquired their wealth thanks to Milosevic and his secret police, and that opening the files will reveal this. 
The SPO proposed such a law in 2004. Today, the party is calling on the commission to announce the names of all secret police collaborators whose spying activities led to tragic consequences. 
That would include the spies who followed journalist Slavko Curuvija, who was murdered in 1999, as well as the other victims of the Milosevic regime. It would also include collaborators who were paid for their services through illegal trade. 
The collaborators list, according to the SPO, must include all of those who reported people critical of the regime to the communist authorities, and those whose books, films and theatre pieces were banned because of the secret reports. 
Citizens' representative Sasa Jankovic told the Belgrade daily Blic that the law is a very important move on the part of the government to rehabilitate those whose rights were violated. 
Jankovic wants to remind the public that Serbia's current secret service -- known by the acronym BIA -- opposed such a law, but now is ready to support it. 
BIA has provided 70,000 secret files to the state archives to date. 
