23/11/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 23/11/04
Earlier this month, the European Commission (EC) presented Albanian authorities with a set of proposals for the integrated management of borders in the Western Balkans. 
The document, also sent to other countries in the region, is intended to serve as a reference for authorities seeking to bring border management procedures into line with European standards. It calls for ensuring that borders are open to trade and legal cross-border movement, while controlling them to prevent crime and other activity that could threaten regional stability. 
Trafficking, illegal immigration, terrorism and organised crime are among the main problems facing the Western Balkans, the document says, noting that effective border management can play a major role in crime prevention, the arrest of criminals and the curbing of illegal profits. At the same time, the EC stresses the importance of cross-border movement in terms of economic development in the region. 
The document was presented during a meeting in Durres on 10 November between EC Ambassador to Albania Lutz Salzmann, Albanian Public Order Minister Igli Toska and Integration Minister Ermelinda Meksi. Also in attendance were OSCE Ambassador Pavel Vacek and the heads of foreign institutions -- including CAM-A, Pameca and Interforze -- that are assisting Albania with improving public order and customs control. 
The Albanian government "appreciates the document", Meksi said, describing it as "another instrument helping to unite the efforts countries in the region are making towards the management of borders according to European standards". 
Toska said, "National institutions will further co-operate to make border crossing points efficient, not only as regards goods and passenger movement, but also concerning control of inter-border criminal activity." 
The concept of integrated border management is closely linked to the Stabilisation and Association Process. The EC will assist with its implementation through the EU's CARDS programme. 
