23/04/2010
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 23/04/10
Many residents of Sarajevo, particularly the young, are profoundly sceptical about improvement prospects in their country's political and economic situation. 
During a recent visit of senior US and EU officials to Sarajevo, the blame was laid squarely at the feet of past and current politicians and what many youth perceive as a fixed system abandoned by the international community. 
Law student Safet Saric, 20, told SETimes that many are both sad and depressed about the current situation and the politics that BiH officials discussed with US Deputy Secretary of State James Steinberg on April 6th. 
"We have a huge political system that seems to do nothing useful except spend taxpayers' money," said Saric. "It is pretty frustrating to see so many unemployed while our politicians spend time and resources arguing about things we should have finished long time ago." 
 Saric pointed out that the 1992-1995 BiH conflict ended 15 years ago. In a decade and a half, he said, many more problems should have been solved. 
 "I feel like we are permanently stuck in the process of reconciliation and recovery, mainly due to a political system that is too complicated and too expensive," Saric said. 
"Our neighbours have got much further in these processes than we have. I certainly hope that we will start moving towards the EU and NATO to finally become a respectful member of the European family." 
Andrej Djerkovic, a 39-year-old artist, believes BiH politicians are only interested in maintaining a status quo, built upon two entities making up a single country. And this, he said, is at the expense of the larger nation and all its citizens. 
"The constitution ... supports this national partition," Djerkovic said. 
 "While [politicians] are mostly interested in their own 'national' issues, the real issues of [greater BiH] -- the economy, health care, education -- take a back seat," said Djerkovic, adding that a constitutional system based on three constituencies undermines people's sense of being BiH citizens. 
A graduate student at the Faculty of Criminology at the University of Sarajevo, Jasna Pekic, 22, agrees that the environment in BiH is too weighted with fractious nationalism. 
 "People are too traumatised by the past to question the present," said Pekic. "And the politicians do everything to [highlight] the differences between our citizens, create the fear of being different, just to keep hold of the enormous power in their hands." 
Pekic is, however, encouraged by the attitudes of her generation. 
"Even though young people are not totally immune to nationalistic rhetoric, we seem to be more worried about the future than the past," she said. "Ideally, I would prefer a total change of our constitution. I am for abolishing the entities and all politics that force nationalism. People should be able to vote for the most competent person, not the person who is from their [entity or political party]." 
Her friend, Aner Zukovic, 23, observed that the political situation in BiH is much more complex than it was four years ago with catastrophically high unemployment and virtually non-existent foreign investment. 
"This is the year of elections and you can see particularly deep divisions" along ethnic lines without an alternative, said Zukovic, noting the current political elite parties will likely win re-election. 
A tax inspector -- Zeljko Radulovic, 37 -- finds that among Sarajevans, a great majority seek changes in the government and the constitution, while folks in rural towns and villages are more prone to obey their ethnic leaders. 
"I do not expect a quick change," said Radulovic. "I feel that the international community left BiH too soon. They should do more to press our irresponsible politicians, because our votes at the elections will, unfortunately, not do much." 
