25/05/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 25/05/09
The political scene in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) has been thrown into disarray by a real estate scandal involving prominent figures. Two key members of the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) are in legal hot water. 
Prosecutors pressed charges last month against entity Prime Minister Nedzad Brankovic and one of his predecessors, Edhem Bicakcic. They stand accused of abusing their mandates in a scheme to misappropriate FBiH funds for illegal real estate gains. 
The case centres around a spacious five-bedroom apartment located in Ciglane, Sarajevo's prime residential area. According to the indictment, Bicakcic enabled Brankovic to purchase the property using a voucher programme set up for Sarajevo residents after the 1990s conflict. 
In essence, the government paid around 120,000 euros in public funds to buy the property, then gave it away for less than 500 euros under the voucher programme. 
At the time, Brankovic was CEO of one of the country's leading state-owned enterprises, Energoinvest. 
The voucher system was designed to allow Sarajevo residents to obtain government-owned apartments if they could prove regular occupancy rights from before the 1992-1995 conflict. 
According to prosecutors, Brankovic "abused his position as CEO of Energoinvest because he … purchased an apartment for himself by using money from that firm as well as from the FBiH government". 
He has refused to comment on the charges against him, saying this is a "sensitive, election period for SDA" and that any statements he makes could be used for harmful purposes. 
 Bicakcic, meanwhile, says the indictment is motivated by politics, including internal feuding within the SDA. He insists at least 50 other political figures engaged in similar deals and wants to know why this one was singled out. 
Brankovic is said to be a key political ally of SDA Vice President Bakir Izetbegovic, who is seeking to dethrone current SDA head Sulejman Tihic at the annual party convention, which kicks off on Tuesday (May 26th). 
 Izetbegovic, son of the late Bosniak leader and SDA founder Alija Izetbegovic, leads a hardline, nationalistic faction within the party, whereas Tihic is considered a moderate. 
The incumbent has called for Brankovic to resign. "Our party rule is that such a person ... cannot fulfil party or public office," Tihic said. His challenger, however, has reserved comment. 
Meanwhile, the BiH state court has confirmed an indictment against 65 political, military and business figures -- including Brankovic, Bicakcic and Croatia Democratic Union party head Dragon Covic. 
 It says they violated the law by allocating "4m euros from the FBiH budget to purchase or renovate apartments or houses for officials … including the incumbent FBiH Prime Minister Nedzad Brankovic". 
The scandal comes at a time when the FBiH is struggling to avoid bankruptcy. FBiH Finance Minister Vjekoslav Bevanda said at a recent parliamentary session "the budget of the Federation is in a crisis, but [this] is no news at all." 
