31/01/2008
(AFP, AP, AKI, Beta, B92, Balkan Insight, EU - 30/01/08)
European Commission (EC) Vice President Franco Frattini arrived in Belgrade on Wednesday (January 30th) to officially launch visa liberalisation talks with Serbian authorities, two days after they were offered a new accord with the EU. 
The political agreement EU foreign ministers proposed on Monday would provide for enhancing trade relations and educational co-operation with the Balkan country and for ending visa restrictions for its citizens. The ministers said they wanted the deal to be signed on February 7th, four days after the presidential runoff in Serbia. 
"Serbia's future is in the EU," Frattini, who also serves as the EU's commissioner for justice, freedom and security, said on Wednesday following talks with Serbian President Boris Tadic. "I came here today to give this message personally, not only to President Tadic, but also to you, the people of Serbia." 
Referring to the accord offered to Serbia on Monday, the commissioner stressed that it was the first official document signed by all 27 nations in the bloc that mentions the Balkan country's possible membership in the Union. 
 "I want to say that our political offer to Serbia means that we are opening Europe's doors and windows, but the Serbian citizens will decide whether or not to enter," Frattini said ahead of Sunday's presidential runoff. 
In the poll, Serbia's incumbent, pro-European president will face Tomislav Nikolic of the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party (SRS), whose official leader, Vojislav Seselj, is currently being tried for war crimes at the UN tribunal in The Hague. 
The EU hopes that Tadic, who trailed Nikolic by five percentage points in the first round on January 20th, will be re-elected Sunday, as it fears that a nationalist win could marginalise Serbia. 
"I want Serbia and Serbian citizens to become a part of our Union and embrace the European heritage and the European values, rights and obligations," Frattini said in remarks Wednesday, welcoming the start of the visa liberalisation talks. 
The commissioner indicated earlier that visa restrictions Serbian travellers to the EU currently face could be lifted as early as next year, after all the necessary requirements are met, notably the introduction of biometric passports. Ahead of his visit, he described as "unacceptable" the fact that 70% of the young Serbs have never travelled abroad. 
"I want your citizens, your students, your teachers and professors to have access to Europe," Frattini said on Wednesday in Belgrade. "I want them to spread European values when they come back home." 
Besides the steps towards easing the visa regime, the EU was also considering setting up a free trade zone with Serbia and including its students in the Erasmus student exchange and education programme, Belgrade-based Beta news agency quoted Frattini as saying. 
