20/07/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 20/07/06
Earlier this month, Dubrovnik hosted many important political figures from the Southeast European region at a summit that targeted security and integration. A total of 80 top officials representing over 40 countries and international organisations attended the two-day summit, which began 9 July. 
The participants discussed the future of the region and its role in the modern political world. Strong emphasis was also placed on the key goals of EU and NATO membership. 
Participants included the prime ministers of Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as the hosts of the event -- Croatian President Stjepan Mesic and Prime Minister Ivo Sanader. Kazakh President Nursultan Nazarbayev was also in attendance. 
In their addresses at the summit, Mesic and Sanader both termed EU and NATO integration a national priority for Croatia. Mesic also urged all SEE countries to leave behind the divisive politics of the past and to look forward to a brighter future. 
In his speech, Sanader said he dreamed that one day a tourist or businessman could drive the entire way from Vienna to Istanbul without stopping at a single border control. "Let’s just imagine the effects that unique shape of freedom would have on the strength and well-being or Europe," he said. 
While problems still remain in the Balkans, it is important that the solutions offered do not generate new crises, participants said. They also agreed that while countries should work together to tackle issues, implementation of agreed-on solutions should come from domestic institutions, rather than external ones. 
Protection of minorities was another issue discussed, with many focusing on the political and economic benefits of accepting minorities and treating them equally. There was also a call for larger countries, including those already a part of the EU, to show the way forward for the smaller countries, and help out wherever possible. 
The summit ended on an optimistic note, with a general conclusion that Southeast Europe was finally headed in a positive direction and has a bright future to look forward to. 
