13/07/2005
(International Herald Tribune, EUobserver, EurActiv - 13/07/05; BBC, FT, DPA, Xinhua, Euro-reporters, Turkish Press - 12/07/05)
British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, called on Tuesday (12 July) for a "digestion pause" in the process of the bloc's further expansion. Nevertheless, he said, the Union should stick to the commitments made to existing applicants, including Bulgaria, Romania, Turkey and Croatia. 
 "We've made commitments to Turkey, we've made commitments to Croatia, my view is that we have to follow those commitments through," Straw told the European Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee. 
Britain, which took over the EU presidency from Luxembourg on 1 July, has described enlargement as a key priority of its six-month chairmanship. It has also made clear its plans to ensure that Turkey's EU accession talks begin on 3 October, as planned. On Tuesday, Straw reiterated his opposition to proposals that would delay the talks or offer Turkey some sort of a "privileged partnership", rather than full membership. 
German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer echoed his words. "After more than four decades of promises, it is very shortsighted to slam the door in Turkey's face. It would be a very high price that we would have to pay if that happened," he said. 
After meetings in Berlin with Fischer and Angela Merkel, the leader of Germany's opposition Christian Democrats, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn also voiced support for Turkey's aspirations for full-fledged membership. He warned that calls for a "privileged partnership" -- an idea supported by Merkel's party -- could discourage Turkey from implementing important reforms. 
The only way for the EU to wield leverage on issues concerning women, minorities or non-Muslim religions in Turkey is to provide "a credible accession [membership] perspective", the Financial Times quoted Rehn as saying Tuesday. 
"Europe needs a stable, democratic and prosperous Turkey that will adopt our values and rule of law," he said in Berlin. "It is in our strategic interests." 
Stressing that he had not yet heard any "convincing" explanation from advocates of a privileged partnership as to what this arrangement would entail, Rehn said he is determined that membership talks with Ankara begin on 3 October and "create the conditions for Turkey to continue its bold and significant reforms". 
Prior to that, all 25 member states must endorse the EU's negotiating mandate. A recently approved draft describes the accession talks with Turkey as an open-ended process, offering no guarantees that it will necessarily lead to membership. 
Speaking before the EP's foreign affairs committee Tuesday, Turkey's chief EU negotiator, Economy Minister Ali Babacan, said that neither any EU document, nor any signed by Turkey and the EU, envisions any option other than full-fledged membership. 
Turkey has no desire "to enter into any other relationship that cannot be described as full membership", Babacan stressed. 
