02/07/2004
(Office of the High Representative, SFOR, VOA, Reuters, AFP, AP, CNN, RFE/RL, UPI, FENA, Radio B92 - 01/07/04)
High Representative Paddy Ashdown, the top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), confirmed Thursday (1 July) that a special audit has established financial abuse and misappropriations by Republika Srpska's (RS) ruling Serb Democratic Party (SDS).
Systematic accounting problems suggest that it is quite possible for SDS to have financed war crimes indictees and support networks, Ashdown said.
"This review reveals a catalogue of abuse, corruption and tax evasion at all levels of the SDS," Ashdown told reporters in Sarajevo. "There is a complete, even criminal absence of proper control designed to ensure the observance of the law and to prevent the passage of funds to and from criminal and war criminal networks, and support structures."
As a result of the findings, he said, "We cannot be confident that the party is no longer providing financial assistance to its indicted founder, Radovan Karadzic."
The audit report, excluding the information that has been forwarded to the Public Prosecutor's Office, was released a day after Ashdown sacked 60 Bosnian Serb officials for not co-operating with the UN war crimes tribunal -- a move he said was necessary to clean up "a party that has been pervaded by corruption and has in turn corrupted the institutions of the RS".
Among those removed from their posts were RS Parliament Speaker and party chief Dragan Kalinic, and RS Interior Minister Zoran Djeric. Based on the audit findings, Ashdown also decided to freeze all 60 SDS municipal accounts.
The information gathered as part of the review process has also revealed the nationalist party's involvement in illegal transactions with enterprises and public bodies, said Ashdown. In addition, there were "indications of repeated, multiple and flagrant breaches of electoral law".
In other news Thursday, SFOR peacekeepers backed by local police carried out a search operation in the eastern town of Han Pijesak, the main wartime base of former Bosnian Serb military chief Ratko Mladic.
Both Karadzic and Mladic have been charged with genocide by the UN tribunal for their roles in the 1992-1995 war in BiH.
SFOR spokesman Marc Hope said the search was part of normal framework operations conducted by peacekeepers. He did not say if it was targeting war crimes suspects.
According to a senior EU official, the latest moves by the international community are creating mounting pressure on war crimes indictees and their supporters.
"Clearly there is more NATO activity than ever before," Reuters quoted the official as saying. "If you put together the more intense NATO activity and Ashdown's move, you could reach the conclusion that these guys should hand themselves over."
