10/11/2010
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens – 10/11/10
The first round of local and regional elections in Greece on Sunday (November 7th) ended on an anti-climactic note with no clear winners, but with all political sides expressing "satisfaction" over results. 
More importantly, the prospect of a snap general election was unceremoniously ruled out by Prime Minister George Papandreou as quickly as it was threatened in late October. 
One surprise Sunday was voter abstention, which reached a record high of 39%. If blank and void ballots (9.10%) are added to the previous figure then nearly one in two Greek voters turned their backs on the local government election, an unprecedented figure in Greece. Just as worrying was the rate of abstention in the largest municipalities, with the figure in the municipality of Athens reaching an unprecedented 54.5%. 
Ruling PASOK party-backed candidates picked up two regions -- PASOK stronghold Crete and the Southern Aegean -- in the first round, leaving the remaining 11 regions to be decided in the second round, which will be held November 14th. The country's largest municipalities -- Athens, Thessaloniki and the port city of Piraeus -- are the big "political prizes" up for grabs, along with the all-important Attica region, which encompasses the 3,000,000-voter area of greater Athens. 
It was viewed as the "litmus test" of the government's political stamina, as the failure of its candidate to make it into the second round would have rocked its confidence. 
The top two vote-getters will vie for the post of regional head, or mayor, at the weekend, whereas the number of municipal councilors and regional councilors was decided in the first round. 
Speaking after precincts had closed Sunday, Papandreou said he wouldn't declare an early election after all, with top ministers and the government spokesman subsequently explaining that results proved voters backed the government's tough austerity programme and reforms. 
Nevertheless, a day after the first round votes were tallied, the Athens-based research firm Public Issue pinpointed PASOK's electoral performance at 34.67%, significantly down from the 43.92% mark the party posted when it won the October 2009 general elections. 
The main opposition New Democracy (ND) party's electoral strength was pegged at 32.6%, while the big winner of the night was the Communist Party (KKE), whose election strength was estimated to swell to 10.8% -- based on nationwide calculations -- on the back of its virulent anti-EU and anti-austerity platform. 
The lack of precise figures stems from the fact that in many races, candidates were backed by more than one party, featuring the small right-of-centre LAOS party and a splintered leftist movement. 
"The government side (PASOK) lost a large part of its electoral power, [and is now] finding it difficult to organise for the next day, which includes a stricter implementation of the memorandum's policy, and even the taking of additional structural measures," Giorgos Kyrtsos, the publisher of Greece's biggest free press daily, City Press, wrote on Monday. 
He was referring to the memorandum signed by the Greek government with the EU-ECB-IMF "troika" in order to access a 110-billion-euro bailout agreed to last May. Hefty government spending cuts, social security reforms and downsizing the cavernous wider public sector are the highlights of the memorandum, along with opening up so-called "closed professions" and a more flexible labour market in the east Mediterranean nation of 11 million. 
