22/09/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 22/09/04
The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is considering the first-ever formal request by prosecutors to transfer war crimes trials to local authorities. In early September, ICTY presiding Judge Theodor Meron announced the establishment of a trial chamber that will decide whether the trials of Croatian Generals Mirko Norac and Rahim Ademi should be held in Croatia. They were indicted for their alleged role in atrocities during a 1993 military operation. 
The decision by prosecutors to file the request is widely seen as a sign of improved Croatian co-operation with the UN court. If the three-judge chamber gives the go-ahead, Ademi and Norac will be handed over to Croatian authorities and prosecutors will provide all the necessary materials to their counterparts. According to Croatian Justice Minister Vesna Skare-Ozbolt, the trial could begin in Croatia by the end of this year. 
The Hague's rules allow for trials to be transferred to a country where the alleged crime was committed or the accused was arrested, or where there is jurisdiction and a willingness to accept the case. 
As part of the effort to complete all remaining work by 2010, tribunal officials are examining whether the trials of some indicted individuals can be transferred effectively to local courts. 
Ademi, 50, and Norac, 60, were commanders during a September 1993 military operation against a Serb enclave known as the Medak Pocket. At least 29 were killed and many others wounded when Croatian forces attacked the enclave, destroying most of its farm buildings and agricultural equipment in an apparent effort to render the area uninhabitable to the survivors. 
The two generals surrendered immediately after the charges against them were issued, and have since been incarcerated at The Hague. According to their defence lawyers, all conditions have been fulfilled for their release. 
In a report issued over the summer, the OSCE concluded that Croatia is ready to take over a limited number of war crimes cases from The Hague. The organisation cited government efforts to prosecute war crimes indictees, changes in public attitudes concerning the prosecution of Croatian citizens, and a government programme to train judges to handle war crimes cases. 
