09/06/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 09/06/04
In a move that has startled domestic observers and economists, Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic has said the country will not accept a further reduction in customs duties and will, instead, seek to increase duties that have already been reduced.
Under the Action Plan on Harmonisation of Economic Relations between Serbia and Montenegro, duties for some types of goods were lowered in 2003. The minister said authorities would propose raising those duties, and would decline to lower duties on 56 additional agricultural products.
Harmonisation of the customs systems of Serbia and Montenegro will not be easy, especially within the time limit expected by the EU, he added.
Dinkic's statement came as a surprise because it followed a visit by EC External Relations Commissioner Chris Patten, who was told by Serbian and Montenegrin customs officials that negotiations were going well. Some economists, meanwhile, have questioned the rationale behind the move.
Budgetary considerations were among the reasons given by Dinkic. But Boris Begovic, vice president of the Centre for Liberal-Democratic Studies, says the argument is not convincing because customs duties constitute only 10 per cent of budget income, and increases in duties do not necessarily lead to an increase in income.
"What happened in 2001, when in the face of high demand a reduction in customs duties resulted in an increase in budget income? Simply, imports increased, the customs duties base used for calculating customs duties expanded, and hence income increased," Begovic said.
Responding to Dinkic's argument that the government should protect domestic companies by preventing uncontrolled imports through appropriate customs duties -- in spite of EU pressures for Serbia and Montenegro to create a customs union -- Begovic said that increases in budget income and protectionism are conflicting objectives.
"Who will benefit from protectionism in our environment? Existing manufacturers will benefit and only those who are not competitive and who cannot export their products, and hence cannot compete in foreign markets. Well, we will be protecting them by increasing customs duties," Begovic said.
Such actions also signal that Serbia, while wanting to join the EU, refuses to accept EU criteria -- a politically inconsistent message, Begovic added.
