02/05/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times – 02/05/07
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan announced late on Tuesday (May 1st) his decision to call for early elections, after the country's highest court annulled Friday's vote by Parliament to elect the new president. 
The general election will be brought forward to June 24th, instead of November as originally scheduled, Erdogan said. He also revealed plans to change the constitution so that the head of state is chosen in a popular vote, rather than by Parliament. 
Erdogan's decision falls short of addressing the concerns of Turkey's secular forces, the opposition and the military. It is, however, expected to ease weeks of political tension in the country. 
Hundreds of thousands of protestors have rallied in Ankara and Istanbul in support of secularism and against Erdogan's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP). At the same time, Turkey's military, which traditionally views itself as the guardian of secularism, has issued a strong warning against the government. It vowed to defend the legacy of the state's founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, and accused the government of tolerating radical Islam. The military also signalled that it might resist the AKP's candidate for president, Abdullah Gul, due to his Islamist past. 
A total of 361 lawmakers -- mostly AKP members -- attended Friday's parliamentary session, and 357 of them voted for the only candidate, Foreign Minister Gul. The participation of at least 367 lawmakers was needed for a quorum, but opposition parties boycotted the session. They have criticised the AKP for failing to seek a consensus presidential candidate who would have broader support among different sectors of society. 
The secularist opposition party CHP then went to court, seeking to have Friday's vote annulled. 
Erdogan, who is AKP leader as well as prime minister, put forward Gul as a candidate last week after months of speculation and public debate over whether he himself would run. Gul is a well-known figure in the West, and is generally seen as comparatively moderate. Turkish secularists, though, are convinced that he shares a hidden Islamist agenda. 
Both Erdogan and Gul were members of an Islamist political movement banned in 1998. Its former cadres then founded the AKP, describing it as a "conservative democrat" party and saying it had moved beyond its Islamist roots. 
"I am optimistic about the future of Turkish democracy. We should look at the developments within a wider context," Semih Idiz, a prominent Turkish columnist and foreign policy expert said on Wednesday. "When the military made such a strong statement, the government had the confidence to oppose it. Many NGOs and intellectuals criticised the military. This is possible, thanks to the development of Turkish democracy within the EU process." 
"Hundreds of thousands of protestors marched in Istanbul, not only for secularism, but also against a military coup. Most of these protestors were women's NGOs. The AKP should understand that secularism is a concern for majority of people in this country, and this concern should be addressed," Idiz said. 
