23/01/2006
(Rompres, Turkish Daily News, bTV, ABC Online, Planet Ark, Sofia News Agency - 23/01/06; Athens News Agency, The Hellenic Radio, Sofia News Agency, Xinhua - 22/01/06; Mediapool - 20/01/06)
The freezing temperatures that hit much of northern and eastern Europe over the past week have descended on several Balkan countries, claiming victims in Romania and Turkey. The cold front, which reached Bulgaria and Greece on Monday (23 January), is not expected to ease until later in the week. 
The Romanian news agency Rompres reported on Monday that a 51-year-old man was found dead near the village of Tifesti in the eastern Vrancea county at the weekend, while a 41-year-old man died of frostbite in the Black Sea port of Constanta. Three lives had already been claimed by the cold spell that hit the country last week. In addition, seven people have been hospitalised in the eastern city of Bacau after exposure to sub-freezing temperatures. 
Romania's meteorological agency said temperatures were likely to drop to minus 25 degrees Celsius in northern Romania and the Sub-Carpathian hills and even to minus 31 degrees Celsius in other parts of the country, where high winds were also expected. 
The harsh weather has also affected gas supplies in Romania. To protect the supply to households, authorities have increased domestic output and are said to have unblocked part of the country's stored quantities, while reducing supplies to some industrial plants. 
Heavy snowfall in Turkey has left over 3,600 villages in the north and east cut off. A man died of exposure at the weekend, while an avalanche killed nine people and injured 17 others traveling in a coach between the eastern cities of Bitlis and Diyarbakir. 
With heavy snow expected on Monday and Tuesday, Istanbul Governor Muammer Gular has urged residents of Turkey's largest city to use public transport rather than their own cars. 
Bulgaria awoke on Monday to snow and temperatures of minus 10 degrees Celsius in Sofia and as low as minus 17 degrees Celsius in other parts of the country. Officials have already warned about possible problems with public transportation, electricity supplies and central heating. 
In Greece, Public Order Minister George Voulgarakis instructed police and fire brigade officials to put their staff on full alert. Meteorologists predict fierce storms, heavy snowfall, northerly gales and a temperature drop of 12 degrees Celsius, with conditions starting to ease on Wednesday. 
