13/08/2009
By Alina Bandila for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 13/08/09
Romania's cultural sector has been shaken badly by the global economic crisis. After readjusting the budget, state financing for cultural projects has been cut in half when compared to last year. 
"We did not receive any money from the ministry of culture," said Danut Manea, musical director of the Brasov Philharmonic Orchestra. 
Scarce funding is forcing organisers to change the scope of most of their traditional events to keep them afloat, hoping to only scale down in size, and not quality. However, many feel the projects still suffer. 
The National Theatre Festival, held in early November, recently announced it would almost exclusively feature Romanian rather than international productions. Cristina Modreanu, theatre critic and artistic director, sounded the alarm. "We have serious reasons to worry. There is a state of depression ... and even indignation." 
The Chamber Music Festival, which features the Brasov Philharmonic Orchestra, faced a similar fate, as none of its performers were paid. The festival also lost its international status, as only one foreign musician, a violinist from Turkey, performed. 
The Bucharest cultural foundation Ideea Europeana (The European Idea) requested funding to participate at The Novel European Festival in Greece, but did not receive a cent. Aura Christi, who manages the foundation, claims the rejection is unjustified and blames "excess bureaucracy and a lack of professionalism" in the culture ministry. 
The ministry's General Secretary, Mircea Staicu, explains the decision. "Under these circumstances, even the money given to several cultural operators was halved. We had to suspend this year the grant funding programmes, too. We cannot risk giving money to two or three projects from hundreds of requests. We would put ourselves in a very delicate position." 
The George Enescu International Festival and Contest, held annually during most of September, is the only cultural event not impacted by the cuts. Culture Minister Theodor Paleologu said the cost of this year's edition totals approximately 7m euros. 
While the sum may appear huge for Romania, this year's event will take place in four cities and will feature a slew of grand orchestras, chamber bands, choirs, and solo artists from around the world. 
The lack of funding has also bruised the publishing sector, as the culture ministry blocked the purchase of books for public libraries, impacting readers and publishing houses alike. However, Bucharest Book Fest organisers, with a greatly reduced budget, achieved significant book sales. 
This year's educational book fair, Gaudeamus, topped visitors and sales records. Organiser Vladimir Epstein explained, "The financial crisis and the psychological tension generated by the lack of funds produced an authentic selection of values and a comeback towards reading." 
