09/12/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 09/12/09
Greek leaders expressed satisfaction Tuesday (December 8th) as EU foreign ministers put off deciding on a launch date for Macedonia's accession talks. 
The name dispute between the two countries must be resolved first, Greek Alternate Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas said. 
 "Before a solution is achieved there is no question of starting negotiations," he said, adding that Greece is ready to help with the accession process once the long-standing issue is overcome. 
To avoid an outright Greek veto, the EU ministers decided to revisit the matter during the first half of 2010, when Spain will have taken over the rotating EU presidency. Although current presidency holder Sweden had presented draft proposals concerning a start date, it was unable to achieve a consensus in the face of strong objections from Athens. 
Reaction in Skopje was immediate. Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said the decision was simply a more sophisticated version of what happened at the NATO summit in Bucharest last April, when Greece squelched Macedonia's NATO bid. 
Open issues between the two countries cannot be tackled through blackmail and blockades, he stressed. Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki, meanwhile, described the outcome of Tuesday's EU meeting as "another Greek hypocrisy". 
A group of students from Skopje's Sts. Cyril and Methodius University announced plans for a protest Wednesday in front of the EU representative's office. 
According to European Parliament member Eduard Kukan, the chances of a achieving a breakthrough rest with the newly-elected Greek government. "If there is no progress under [new Greek Prime Minister George] Papandreou, I really don't know how we can resolve the name issue," he said. 
Kukan, who chairs the European Parliament's delegation for relations with Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro and Kosovo, cautioned Macedonians against allowing the dispute to fuel nationalistic sentiment. 
Gruevski's government has very strong popular support, he noted. "This could be used in two directions: either to approve brave, courageous political decisions on the name issue, or to exacerbate nationalism," he said. 
Last week, Gruevski met with European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso to discuss the situation. 
Barroso said that he is convinced that there is real possibility of a solution and both countries need to show political will to achieve it. "EU membership is the most important goal in a foreign policy of your country, together with the NATO membership," he told Gruevski. 
Gruevski said his latest direct meetings with Papandreou had a positive tone but failed to yield anything concrete. "There is dialogue …but still we don't have [any] serious progress on the substance of the issue," he said. 
SETimes contributor Harry Tzanis contributed to this report. 
