21/03/2005
(Blic - 21/03/05; Reuters, Radio B92, Beta - 20/03/05; AP, EU, Serbian Government - 18/03/05)
EU security chief Javier Solana is scheduled to meet with Serbia's leaders this week as Brussels moves towards finalisation of a key assessment of Serbia-Montenegro's preparedness for building closer ties with the Union. 
 Serbian President Boris Tadic is paying a one-day visit to the Belgian capital on Monday (21 March). His meeting with Solana "will provide an opportunity to discuss the political situation in Serbia, the European perspective of Serbia-Montenegro and the situation in Kosovo" according to a statement from Solana's office on Friday. EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn is expected to participate in the talks. 
Serbia's progress in meeting its commitments to the EU and the level of its co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) will be among the issues Solana will discuss with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica during his visit to Brussels on Tuesday. Kostunica is also expected to meet with Rehn. 
 At the end of March, the EU is expected to release a feasibility study of Serbia-Montenegro's progress. A positive assessment is needed for Brussels to initiate talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Belgrade, a first step in the EU integration process. 
Full co-operation with the ICTY is a key precondition all countries involved in the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s must meet to move ahead on that path. 
On Sunday, the Serbian government announced the upcoming transfer of another war crimes suspect, the latest in a series over the past several weeks. 
Bosnian Serb General Vinko Pandurevic, who is charged with genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, will reportedly turn himself in on Wednesday. He will be the eighth indictee to go voluntarily to The Hague in two months. 
"I expect we'll keep up this trend of surrenders," Serbia-Montenegro Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic said Sunday. "We have to do everything possible in the next two weeks to convince the tribunal and the international community that we shall fulfil all our obligations," he added. 
Former Bosnian Serb President Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic, have been on the run for more than nine years now. Two former top Serb generals, Sreten Lukic and Nebojsa Pavkovic, are also among the 12 indictees that UN prosecutors want Belgrade to arrest and hand over. 
"If we are to get a positive feasibility study at the end of the month, it is necessary that generals Pavkovic and Lukic are delivered to The Hague tribunal," Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic told the daily Blic on Sunday. 
