21/02/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 21/02/05
In another step towards meeting the criteria for EU accession, Macedonia has launched a police division focused on battling organised crime. The move is part of a broader police reform effort that has also included the establishment of a border police service. 
"The team has been formed," Interior Minister Ljubomir Mihajlovski said, "and its operation will justify the confidence given to us in the fight against organised crime." A total of 200 personnel have already passed the first phase of training, and will now start a second phase involving co-operation with the Public Prosecution Office. 
"The division will be involved in shedding light on, proving and apprehending the perpetrators of criminal acts for which imprisonment sentences of four years and more is anticipated, and are committed by an organised group of three or more people," said Interior Ministry Undersecretary Stojce Tosev, who heads the newly-established team. 
The division is composed of ten sectors -- including a Finance Crime Sector, Weapon and Hazardous Matter Sector, Drugs and Criminal Intelligence Sector and Analysis Sector. According to Tosev, it will co-operate with similar institutions in other countries. 
 "German and Irish experts, as well as the Proxima Mission and OSCE, have assisted us in establishing and structuring the division," said Vojce Zafirovski, senior adviser to the minister and member of the reform group. 
"What is to be done in the next period for more efficient operation of the division is the passage of two key laws on witness protection, as well as a law on monitoring telecommunications," Zafirovski said. 
Police reform is one of Macedonia's key obligations under its Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU. In 2003, the Union established the Proxima police mission -- the successor to the earlier Concordia peacekeeping mission -- to help the country meet its reform goals. These include bringing greater transparency and accountability to the police, as well as boosting operational effectiveness in upholding the rule of law and fighting organised crime. 
