07/02/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 07/02/08
Slovenia on Tuesday (February 5th) officially voiced opposition to the protected fishing zone (ZERP) that Croatia implemented at the beginning of the year. The zone, which affects EU-members Slovenia and Italy, has been a major point of contention. 
Despite intense discussions among diplomats and officials, no solution has been accepted by both sides. Compounding the issue is the ongoing land dispute between Croatia and Slovenia. 
 Earlier this week, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader suggested that Slovenia -- which currently holds the EU presidency -- was blocking Croatia's accession bid due to the disagreement. 
According to Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Jansa, however, Croatia has failed to meet the conditions for opening negotiations with the EU on the fisheries chapter of the acquis. 
"We are not blocking negotiations on fisheries; rather it is Slovenia's understandable position," Jansa said on Tuesday. He insisted that a mutually acceptable solution to the problem can be found. 
Jansa said he is willing to meet with Sanader, but only if Italy is also involved. 
"The meeting would not just be between Ljubljana and Zagreb, but it would be a meeting in the same framework as the one when the 2004 agreement was reached -- with the co-operation of the European Commission and the involvement of Italy," he told reporters. 
The ZERP issue threatens to slow Croatia's EU bid at a time when it otherwise seems poised to move ahead quickly. 
Hannes Swoboda, the European Parliament's rapporteur for Croatia, led a delegation to Zagreb this week. In talks with Sanader, he said Croatia could potentially wrap up its EU accession process by the end of 2009. 
Sanader said his government hopes to "complete most of the work" this year. But as long as the dispute with Croatia continues, some negotiating chapters may continue to be blocked. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has called on all sides in the dispute to avoid escalating tensions and instead make a serious effort to find a political solution "in a European spirit of compromise and good neighbouring relations," Rehn said on Wednesday. 
Last week, Croatian President Stipe Mesic held an informal meeting with his Slovenian counterpart, Danilo Turk, in a bid to calm the situation. They both urged their governments to settle the dispute and resolve issues in a friendly manner. 
"We should welcome mutual respect and avoid statements that are negative and should not be a part of our dialogue," Turk said after the February 1st meeting. 
"It must be clear that we have good relations with Slovenia, except for a few open issues," Mesic said, adding that Zagreb and Ljubljana should sit down at the table and discuss the outstanding issues. 
