11/10/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 11/10/04
Five US SFOR soldiers and handful of local authorities in Ugljevik, in northeastern Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), sat around a table on a recent morning, hammering out the logistical details as to how area authorities could collect weapons held by civilians. 
"We're not professionals, and we can't pick up explosives and weapons and keep them at our houses," said Deputy Mayor Aco Tomic. 
Meetings between SFOR soldiers and local authorities are nothing new. What is new is that when the soldiers went home after the meeting, they headed to their own house in town, rather than to a nearby military base. 
Since July, more than a dozen Indiana National Guard troops have been living in this three-story house -- which, apart from a wooden weapons-discharging box outside and a bright yellow sign forbidding photography, blends in with the other grey-stone façade houses on the street. Along with meeting regularly with municipal officials and police, they have a "receiving room" where local people can come to them with their concerns. 
They visit political party offices. They read the local press, courtesy of their two live-in translators. 
"We are the direct liaison for the general populace, and as observation teams we monitor what goes on in the areas that we cover,"said Sergeant Charles Mitchener.
The restructuring of the NATO peacekeeping force in preparation for an EU takeover at the end of the year -- which included a drawdown to 7,000 troops in June -- paved the way for the Liaison and Observation Team (LOT) house concept, of which the Ugljevik house is part. More than 40 of the houses are scattered throughout BiH. 
Today, while the adults seem to be accepting -- only giving passing glances to two soldiers eating in a local restaurant -- the children can be downright friendly. At the house, a group of kids passing by shouted a chorus of "Hi"s in English up at one soldier on the balcony. "How are you guys?" he asked in the local language. "We're good -- we're going to school,” hollered one girl, before they erupted into giggles. 
"I interact with the kids all the time, and that's how I’ve been learning Serbo-Croatian," said Specialist Donald Pence, adding that the "real experience" was the best thing about living and working in the town. 
Another guardsman, whose first deployment to BiH was in 2002, said that living here was much better than living insulated on base. 
"I'd prefer to be in the house," said Sergeant Matt Beck. "This is the main focus of the US mission now -- it's kind of a proving ground for this concept." 
