25/06/2010
(AFP, DPA, The Guardian, Scotsman, ANA-MPA - 25/06/10; AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, CNN, FT, Wall Street Journal, Telegraph, Deutsche Welle, ANA-MPA - 24/10/06)
A parcel bomb, disguised as a gift, exploded inside Greece's citizen's protection ministry on Thursday night (June 24th), killing a senior ministerial aide. 
The blast occurred shortly after 8pm, several metres away from Public Order Minister Michalis Chrysohoides's office on the seventh floor of the heavily guarded building in Athens. 
Police said the device went off when the minister's personal security chief, Giorgos Vassilakis, a 50-year-old police officer, tried to open what seemed to be a box of sweets. 
"It was a wrapped package that exploded in the aide's hands after he apparently picked it up and tried to open it," police spokesman Thanassis Kokkalakis explained. "We heard a big bang; there was a lot of smoke and damage." 
Ministry officials were immediately evacuated and police sealed off the building. 
Chrysohoides, who was not injured, said the package had been meant for him. Visibly distressed and shaken by Vassilakis's death, he promised that those behind the attack will face justice. 
"I lost a friend, a valuable associate and father of two children," Chrysohoides told reporters outside his ministry just minutes after the explosion. "These cowardly murderers will be brought to justice," he added, stressing that such incidents will not deter police from efforts "to keep our citizens, neighbourhoods and cities safe". 
There was no immediate claim of responsibility. 
In remarks to the BBC, Greek terrorism expert Athanasios Drougas pointed at Revolutionary Struggle, the country's most violent militant group, which is on EU and US terrorist lists, as possibly being behind the bombing. Police arrested the alleged ringleader and five other members of the organisation earlier this year. 
Drougas believes the aim of Thursday's attack was to show that the group has not been defeated. 
Condemning it as a "terrorist attack", Prime Minister George Papandreou expressed his condolences to Vassilakis's family, pledging that his government will not allow radical militants to achieve their goals or to terrorise Greeks. 
"In a period when the country and our people are waging a daily struggle for the exit from the crisis, cowardly murderers want to deal a blow at normalcy and our democracy," he said in a statement late Thursday. 
Authorities investigating the bombing are working to determine whether the bomb was delivered to the ministry by hand or by mail. 
