14/02/2005
(AFP, Cyprus News Agency, Turkish Daily News - 13/02/05; AFP, Kathimerini, Cyprus News Agency, Zaman, Turkish Daily News - 12/02/05)
Describing his trip to Turkey as very successful, Greek Cypriot opposition leader Nicos Anastassiades voiced hope Sunday (13 February) that developments over the coming months could bring about a solution to the Cyprus issue. 
The head of the second-largest Greek Cypriot political force, and three members of his Democratic Rally Party (DISY), arrived on a five-day visit to Turkey on Wednesday at the invitation of the country's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP). Anastassiades is the first Greek Cypriot political leader to visit Turkey in more than 40 years. 
"We came here to convey the concerns of the Greek Cypriots and to sound out intentions," the Cyprus News Agency (CNA) quoted the DISY leader as saying in Istanbul on Sunday after his delegation's meeting with Greek Orthodox Patriarch Bartholomew I. "We return to Cyprus having an overall picture of the situation, but also with hope that Turkey's European perspective and the new initiative which we hope will unfold in the coming months will help at long last to create conditions for the reunification of Cyprus." 
During his visit, Anastassiades met with senior officials, including Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul. 
After his meeting Saturday with Erdogan, the DISY leader said it had taken place "in a friendly atmosphere" and had been very constructive and useful. "We have launched a dialogue," Anastassiades said. Erdogan reportedly said that a new initiative would probably be launched after the Turkish Cypriots hold presidential elections in April. 
The latest effort to reunify Cyprus ended in failure when Greek Cypriots rejected a UN-sponsored peace plan in a referendum last April. DISY was the only Greek Cypriot political force that backed the plan. Although a majority of Turkish Cypriots voted in favor of the plan, only the internationally recognised Greek-controlled southern part of the Mediterranean island joined the EU on 1 May 2004. 
Meanwhile, Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos said Sunday that Nicosia has been working for the resumption of negotiations. Papadopoulos was among those who openly rallied against the UN peace plan last year. He has since said that talks should be relaunched, but on the basis of a revised UN plan that takes into account the Greek Cypriot concerns. 
According to reports, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan asked the Greek Cypriot leadership last week to detail its objections to the UN blueprint. 
"I would urge the president to really put his views on paper, the changes he would want to have," the UN chief was quoted as saying. "The proposal was on the table … and a detailed list of his objections would help." 
But Papadopoulos says Annan's request amounted to a call for the government to reveal its negotiation strategy ahead of a possible new round of talks. 
