29/12/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 29/12/11 
Ten people accused of helping Ratko Mladic, himself on trial at The Hague tribunal charged with genocide at Srebrenica, are facing a retrial that began on December 21st. The ten are charged with helping Mladic hide from 2002 to 2006, while the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) had a warrant out for his arrest. 
The trial is the result of a ruling by the Appeals Court in July that overturned the acquittal of the ten defendants in their first trial. 
Judge Tatjana Stefanovic said she would ask for Mladic's testimony because "he needs to answer important questions about his many years of hiding." 
The defendants' lawyers, however, insist that Mladic's health and mental stability must first be determined to ensure he is a valid witness. 
"A team of appropriate experts must do so. After all he lived through there is reason to assume his mental health deteriorated and his testimony might not be sufficiently reliable," lawyer Milos Saljic, who represented Mladic while he was in custody in Belgrade, told SETimes. 
The ten lawyers representing the defendants pointed out that it would be necessary to meet with Mladic in Scheveningen. 
"Fortunately, Mladic is still alive and will be able to testify that these people had nothing to do with the fact that the ICTY was not able to put Mladic behind bars," lawyer Nebojsa Milosavljevic told SETimes. 
All of the accused stand by their statements given at the first trial, denying that they hid Mladic. Seven decided not to testify at the new trial, while three will speak in their own defence. 
Asked by the judge whether they ever met Mladic, one of the accused, Borislav Ivanovic, said he had once. 
"My mother took care of his apartment where I once saw him, when I came over," said Ivanovic. He confirmed that he knew who Mladic was from the media. 
Several defendants said they made statements under police pressure, and that during the first trial they often received telephone threats. 
"We hope that the new court proceedings [will include] all the evidence, that there won't be delays and that we will get short-term sentence under the law," Milan Antonijevic, president of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, told SETimes. 
Antonijevic said it will be determined during the course of the trial whether or not Mladic's circle of support was wider than the ten defendants. 
In his opinion, the court has the opportunity to clarify if two soldiers of the Serbian and Montenegro army, Dragan Jakovljevic and Drazen Milovanovic, were killed in 2004 at the military facility in Karas to prevent a leak that Mladic was hiding at the facility at the time. 
The defendants' lawyers say they are not certain the trial will be fair. 
"By giving Mladic a chance to confess if the accused did hide him, it is still questionable if the trial will be conducted fairly, without state interference," lawyer Krsto Bobot told SETimes. 
Mladic is scheduled to appear in court as a witness on February 22nd. 
The first trial against the ten lasted more than four years and ended in 2010. 
Presiding trial judge Dejan Garic decided some were not proven guilty, while for others the offence became obsolete. 
Serge Brammertz, chief prosecutor of The Hague tribunal, has said it is necessary to determine who participated in the Mladic support network during the ten years he was in hiding. 
