26/07/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 26/07/10
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is still one of the most mine-infested countries in Southeast Europe. The total estimated mine-clearing area is 1,555 square kilometers, or approximately 3% of total territory. 
 An evaluation of the existing Mine Action Strategy and a new Strategic Plan was made for 2009-2019, guided by the 1997 Convention Banning Production, Use, Stockpiling and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines. 
 There are 220,000 mines in 3,077 locations across the country, according to the latest assessment. The Strategic Plan effort envisions a mine-free BiH by 2019, as well as assuring the expectations of local and international communities. 
Mostar's Provita is one of the mine-clearing companies involved. 
A mine site was found in Krivajevici, next to the main road from Sarajevo to Tuzla, which has been designated as a nature park. The area is visited by tourists interested in the Bijambare Caves, Olovo Spa and Nisici Plateau. 
The road connects northern Bosnia with the Adriatic Coast, and carries a lot of traffic. Due to current mine removal efforts, traffic is interrupted every 20 minutes at the site. 
 At Krivajevici, so far, workers have cleared 4,000 square metres where they managed to find, deactivate and destroy two anti-tank mines, one mortar shell and one piece of grenade launcher shell. 
"There is still 6,000 square metres to clear, and more is expected to be found. Currently, we have 11 people on the site: eight mine clearing workers, one team leader, one medical worker, and one person in charge of quality control," team leader Ramiz Smajic says. "[Workers use] metal detectors, probes, branch scissors, grass scissors, and they also have good protective equipment," including specialised jackets and helmets. 
Smajic adds that, so far, no personnel have been injured. The team works slowly, planning their actions. 
"It is real luck that nobody ever trampled on these mines, as there were many tourists who occasionally stop by here, as well as workers who repaired the road. Simply incredible," worker Nijaz Dzafo says. 
