01/08/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 01/08/07
Turkey has a stiff requirement for parties to enter parliament -- they must gain at least 10% of the vote. That has proved a barrier not only to small parties, but to several well-established ones as well. In the recent general election, however, the country's pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party (DTP) found a way around the threshold. It fielded dozens of candidates as "independents" in the July 22nd poll. 
Twenty-two of them won seats, and are now expected to form a DTP group in parliament. 
"This is one of the principal conditions of a pluralist democracy, which Turkey has long been deprived of," Ankara University political science professor Dogu Ergil said. "For the first time since 1991, a political group which bases itself on Kurdish identity will form a political group in parliament." 
The country now has a historic opportunity to foster a new political climate, Ergil said. However, he warned, success is by no means guaranteed -- rather, much depends on the policies and actions of the Kurdish deputies. 
"The most important question is [whether they will] pursue radical rhetoric and create more divisions, or will they be constructive, helping enhance pluralistic democracy, an understanding and cultural of co-existence," Ergil said. 
Many in Turkey believe the DTP is influenced by the banned Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK). According to Ergil, the PKK played a role in the choice of candidates and could affect their policy positions, hindering efforts to defeat terrorism and place the Kurdish political movement within the framework of democracy. 
The PKK has fought for an independent Kurdish state since 1984, causing more than 37,000 deaths in the process. It is listed as a terrorist organisation by Turkey, the United States and the EU. 
In 1991, a group of newly-elected Kurdish deputies insisted on taking their parliamentary oaths in Kurdish -- a move that damaged chances for political reconciliation. They were then accused of links to the PKK and ousted from the assembly. Several were imprisoned. 
Sirri Sakık was one of those deputies. Now he has won a seat as an independent. "We have all changed over time. While we have questioned the system in time, we have also questioned our own actions. Nobody should have fear from us now. We are a reality of this country, we want dialogue and peace. We will be constructive," he said. 
DTP's main adversary, the Nationalist Movement Party (MHP), won 71 seats in parliament. The future of the Kurdish issue could hinge on relations between the two parties. Both say they are ready for dialogue. 
"We will always be against separatism, either by terrorism or politics," says MHP Vice-Chairman Mehmet Sandir. "But we do respect the will of our people and their elected deputies. What we expect from them is a sincere commitment to Turkey's independence, unitary state and the rule of law." 
