13/02/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 13/02/12
The BiH military has mobilised hundreds of soldiers to help its citizens cope with record snowfalls that have engulfed the region, cutting off entire towns and villages and leaving many without electricity. 
The BiH Armed Forces have contributed 1,700 soldiers to fight the record storm, which has dumped snow as high as 5m in some areas. Chief of Joint Staff of the Armed Forces of BiH (OS BiH) General Miladin Milojcic told SETimes that the army was included in the molbisation effort since the very first round of paralysing storms. 
"The army [became] involved as soon as the Civil Defence estimates that the assistance of the Armed Forces (OS) is necessary. A few days ago, we had [to] rescue 15 workers at a company that was buried in snow. After our intervention, workers were saved and safely returned to Sarajevo," Milojcic said. 
He said that all OS BiH available machinery is involved in rescues -- primarily helicopters, trucks, tractors and other heavy equipment. 
"The rescue operations are being made throughout the whole country; most evacuations were made in villages where people are stuck in snow, as well as delivering food and medicine to those places which are completely blocked," he added. 
In the framework of existing bilateral co-operation between BiH and the United States government, on Sunday (February 12th) the US Armed Forces delivered motor oils and parts for the helicopters to the Armed Forces of BiH, material crucial to contnued operations in the extreme weather conditions. 
BiH Defence Minister Muhamed Ibrahimagic thanked US Ambassador Patrick Moon, calling it a reaffirmation of Washington's commitment to support BiH. 
Moon noted that USAID is currently working on a collecting assistance for BiH's Red Cross Office and BiH's Ministry of Security. 
"Soldiers help residents of the Federation of BiH and Republika Srpska, riding helicopters, clearing snow, coming to the far sites to deliver what is needed. I am glad that the government and the Armed Forces of BiH help citizens faced with this natural disaster. This is no time for politics but it is time for BiH citizens [to] work together, unite for the general good," Moon said at a news conference. 
At the weekend, another 50cm of snow walloped the country. At least 20 people have frozen to death. 
OS BiH soldier Eldin Ceco, 32 tells SETimes that he and his colleagues have been clearing snow in Sarajevo for days. 
"Our priority was to clear the tram tracks so the traffic can move. Currently, we are clearing snow in front of public institutions as well as supplying food to those citizens who live up in the hills around Sarajevo," Ceco said. 
Meteorologists say much more snow is on the way this week, accompanied by temperatures between -10 and -20 degrees Celcius. 
Dragana Stankovic, 26, of Banja Luka, said that while authorities have been generally doing a good job throughout this natural disaster, greater focus should be placed on rural areas. 
"People in cities can clear their own houses and cars, but the people who live in the countryside currently don't have conditions like people from the city. All available resources should be directed there and help these people as soon as possible," Stankovic told SETimes. 
