26/03/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 26/03/12
The problem of match-fixing is getting worse, Sepp Blatter, the head of the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA), warned in a speech in Turkey on Thursday (March 22nd). 
"There is something that is new and concerns the region where we are and that is illegal betting and this leads to match rigging," he said, addressing delegates at UEFA's XXXVI Congress in Istanbul. "We are working together against the scourge of match-rigging, which is undermining our sport. This makes our sport a matter of chance when matches are being rigged." 
His statement coincided with a still ongoing probe into allegations of match-fixing in the 2010-2011 Turkish League season. Authorities have pressed charges against more than 90 people, including Aziz Yildirim, the chairman of Istanbul giant Fenerbahce, which won last year's championship. 
Seven other teams, Besiktas, Sivasspor and Trabzonspor among them, are also involved in the major scandal, which forced the Turkish Football Federation last summer to ban Fenerbahce from the UEFA's Champions League. 
Addressing the UEFA Congress, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, once a semi-professional player himself, said that individuals, rather than clubs, should be penalised for involvement in match-rigging. 
"We have to identify the difference between individuals and legal entities," Bloomberg news agency quoted him as saying. "If a legal entity is punished for the crime of an individual, millions of people would be punished." 
Former French football legend Michel Platini, who was re-elected to a second four-year term as UEFA president on Thursday, said that that the effective rules must be observed. 
"On principle, I agree [with Erdogan]," he said. "[But] this is how it is. If there is another way, we'll think about it." 
Cetin Cem Yilmaz, sports editor at Hurriyet, disagreed with Erdogan's solution. 
"In football, it is impossible to separate individuals from their clubs, because if Aziz Yıldırım or the other 92 people listed as suspects are guilty of manipulating games, it means the clubs have benefited from that wrongdoing," Yilmaz told SETimes. 
"If any team has benefited from match-fixing, punishing just one person for that would not solve the problem, and it will even pave the way for future rigging -- the clubs can easily find someone to put the blame on and benefit from match-fixing." 
During a Council of Europe (CoE) meeting of sports ministers held in Belgrade on March 15th, Platini called for match-fixing to be criminalised in all European countries. Reiterating his appeal for public and political support for efforts to root out football violence and betting fraud, he stressed on Thursday that UEFA would not be able to achieve that on its own, "even with the best will in the world." 
Match-fixing was also a key issue on the agenda of the CoE conference in Belgrade. 
"Our value-based vision of sport is increasingly threatened by pressures which ultimately may encroach upon another of our key values: that of the rule of law," Maud de Boer-Buquicchio, deputy secretary-general of the 47-nation organisation, noted in her speech. 
A resolution adopted at the conference stressed that match-rigging may erode public confidence. It also invited members of the Enlarged Partial Agreement on Sport and other relevant bodies "to launch the negotiation of a possible new international convention against manipulation of sports results and notably match-fixing that could establish an appropriate framework of commitment and co-operation to fight this scourge." 
While the match-fixing scandal in Turkey is said to be one of the biggest of this type in the world, other countries in the region have faced similar problems, on a smaller scale. 
In December, 15 Croatian football players and officials were found guilty on charges of match-fixing for betting purposes. Two of them received suspended sentences, while the rest were handed jail terms of up to ten months. The court also ruled that all were to return nearly 200,000 euros. 
In January, Bulgarian daily Presa reported that, acting on a UEFA alert, prosecutors had launched an investigation into possible illegal betting during the 2011-2012 season involving six local football clubs. Bulgaria's penal code provides for a jail term of up to eight years and fines of up to 5,000 euros for those convicted of involvement in match-fixing and betting fraud. 
Earlier this month, FIFPro, the worldwide union for professional footballers, reported that the Serbian football association has decided to suspend former player Dragisa Pejovic for six months following his allegations about corruption in professional football. 
Pejovic made the revelations during the presentation of a FIFPro survey, called Black Book Eastern Europe, in early February. According to the report, 23.6% of the more than 3,000 professional players that were interviewed said that they were aware of match-fixing in their respective leagues. 
"Players are not paid, players are extorted, players are abused, and players are forced to co-operate in match fixing," FIFPro secretary general Theo van Seggelen said in a statement in mid-February. "That is what the Serbian association must address." 
