10/01/2007
(Financial Mirror - 10/01/07; AP, DPA, VOA, Xinhua, Cyprus News Agency, Cyprus Mail, ABHaber, Zaman, The Anatolian Times, Turkish Daily News - 09/01/07; AFP - 07/01/07; Turkish Weekly - 06/01/07; AP - 05/01/07)
Turkish Cypriots on Tuesday (January 9th) dismantled a footbridge in Nicosia, whose construction in late 2005 frustrated plans for the opening of a crossing in the heart of Cyprus's ethnically partitioned capital. 
At the end of last year, Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat first announced his decision to remove the controversial overpass on the Turkish side of Ledras Street, the main commercial road in Nicosia and a major symbol of the island's 32-year division. 
According to the Greek Cypriots, the metal footbridge was built to enhance Turkish military patrols in the area. 
Talat's plans for the structure's removal were criticised by General Yasar Buyukanit, Turkey's chief of general staff. "The opening of Ledras Street is not a problem for us, but such steps need to be simultaneous," an AFP report on Sunday quoted the general as saying, noting that he had informed Talat of the Turkish military's views during a meeting Friday in Ankara. 
Despite Ankara's opposition, Talat said after the meeting that the decision to demolish the bridge -- one of the preconditions set by Greek Cypriot authorities for the reopening of Ledras Street -- was still valid. 
"Our only aim is to open the crossing," the AP quoted Ozkan Murat, a top Turkish Cypriot interior affairs official, as saying on Tuesday. "As Turkish Cypriots, we have done what had to be done." 
Other preconditions outlined by the Greek Cypriots for the reopening of Ledras Street include the withdrawal of Turkish troops from the area, mine clearing and the restoration of adjacent buildings. 
"The aim of opening Ledras Street is the safe movement of citizens and cultivation of a climate of mutual trust through contact and communication between the two communities," Greek Cypriot government spokesman Christodoulos Pashiardis said on Tuesday. 
Hoping to pave the way for the revival of UN-sponsored peace talks with the Greek Cypriots this year, the Turkish Cypriots have described the move to tear down the controversial bridge as a gesture of good will. 
Pashiardis, however, insisted on Tuesday that the removal of the overpass could by no means be considered as a retreat or concession by the Turkish Cypriots. 
"Removing this illegality … should not be applauded as a noble gesture of goodwill, neither should it be rewarded with concessions on our part," the Cyprus News Agency quoted him as saying. 
Asked if the Greek Cypriot authorities plan to remove a wall in front of the National Guard observation post at Ledras Street, Pashiardis said the government was ready to discuss its proposals for the opening of a crossing point on the thoroughfare through the UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. 
Five crossing points have been opened on the divided island since 2003, none of them in the centre of Nicosia, where barricades were first erected during the interethnic clashes between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots in 1963. 
Cyprus has been divided into a Turkish-run north and Greek-run south since 1974, when Turkish troops occupied about a third of the island's territory. 
