28/03/2013
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 28/03/13
Senior citizens in Macedonia whose pensions are below the country's average will receive free inpatient care at public hospitals under a new programme offered by the health ministry. 
There are 120,000 seniors who will be eligible, as their pensions are less than the average of 176 euros a month. The ministry has designated 600,000 euros from the budget to fund the programme for this year. 
Jovan Grpovski, director of Macedonia's health insurance fund, said the decision to provide free care was the result of discussions between the health ministry and the Association of Pensioners. 
"It was decided to accommodate the need of this important part of the society and to enable the pensioners with the lowest pensions to secure funds for inpatient treatment without paying the co-payment," Grpovski said. "We are fully behind this government programme. We are fully aware of the importance of the health services, and we are working hard in order to provide better quality and a more efficient health system." 
The Association of Pensioners includes 53 organisations that work together to protect and promote the interests of pension beneficiaries. More than 250,000 pensioners were members of the association in 2012. 
"We, as seniors, were asking the government to approve free treatment for all pensioners over 65 years, but now, we think that this solution is even better than we have asked," Dragi Argirovski, association president, told SETimes. 
Citizens should find it easy to access care under the programme. 
"All that a retired person has to do is to show the check as proof that their pension is less than average," said Daniela Aleksovska, a spokesperson from the health ministry. "We immediately informed all hospitals in the state that these patients should not be charged for a treatment." 
Many pensioners are happy with the news. 
"With this, the country shows that we are not forgotten," said Risto Naumovski, a pensioner from Skopje. "Apart from the health treatment they gave us free bus rides and free spa visits. I am very satisfied." 
Last year, Naumovski's wife Marija was hospitalised. 
"I paid a lot. More precisely my son paid for me. My pension was not enough to cover everything. I am very pleased with this measure," Marija said. 
The Macedonian government has increased pensions by 33 percent in the last six years, and citizens at the lowest pension levels received increases of up to 40 percent. 
The government is working on several other projects to aid pensioners, including the opening of state-managed senior centres, giving seniors who can't afford expensive privately run facilities a cost-free option. 
