16/02/2010
(Various sources -- 10/02/10 - 16/02/10)
Bulgaria's former chief prosecutor -- Nikola Filchev -- will be questioned by the government about alleged involvement with organised crime, in the highest profile anti-mafia case in the country thus far. 
During an interview with bTV, Interior Minister Tsvetan Tsvetanov said the decision to question Filchev came a week after police broke up a significant crime gang. Police have code named the operation "Octopus" because of the long, intricate reach of organised crime in Bulgaria. 
Observers there and abroad say the case is critical to the country's fight against organised crime. 
"It's a war," said Prime Minister Boyko Borisov. "Who holds out will win." 
 Six days ago, police arrested 14 suspected members of the group, said to be involved for at least a decade in racketeering, prostitution, money laundering, and tax fraud. On Friday, the Sofia City Court approved holding seven of the suspects without bail. 
Among those locked up was Alexei "The Tractor" Petrov, a former Bulgarian commando and secret agent, who served as adviser to the former head of the State National Security Agency (DANS) until last year. Filchev will be questioned about his relationship with Petrov, Tsvetanov said. 
 During his Tuesday interview (February 15th) with bTV, Tsvetanov said investigators are trying to get as much information as possible about the state's tolerance of organised crime and how the tentacles of "The Octopus" mafia became imbedded in various government agencies. 
Citing sources close to the prosecution, Sofia-based Darik Radio reported on Monday that Filchev would be questioned about his alleged protection of Petrov, as well as lobbying for the former commando's appointment to the Bulgarian intelligence and security services in 2000. 
Filchev, who served as the country's chief prosecutor from 1999 until 2006, is also expected to be interrogated about his role in covering up an investigation code named "Businessmen". 
The right-wing Democrats for a Strong Bulgaria (DSB), whose leader Ivan Kostov served as prime minister from 1997 to 2001, has insisted on Filchev's arrest and thorough investigation. 
"It is time to unravel the entire group operating around former Chief Prosecutor Filchev," said DSB lawmaker Atanas Atanasov, who headed the National Security Service at the time. 
The relatives of Military Prosecutor Nikolay Kolev, gunned down near his Sofia home in late 2002, have repeatedly accused Filchev of being the mastermind of the assassination. 
Nanka Kolev, the victim's widow, insists that Petrov and Filko Slavov -- the former head of the special police forces -- worked together to kill her husband. 
Kolev recently won a case against Bulgaria at the Strasbourg-based European Court of Human Rights, which ruled that the Kolev murder investigation was handled improperly and ordered it to be re-opened. Tsvetanov said on Tuesday that this would happen soon. 
