21/09/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 21/09/09
Veterans in BiH, accompanied by the families of soldiers who lost their lives in action, plan to march Wednesday (September 23rd) in front of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) government building in Sarajevo. 
The announcement of the protest was sparked by a stand-by arrangement with the IMF in July, when the country agreed to cut public sector salaries and welfare allowances for disabled veterans from the 1992-1995 conflict in order to receive approximately 1.2 billion euros from the Fund. 
"We expect to have some 30,000 to 50,000 families of the killed combatants and disabled veterans of war. This time, the protests will last until our requests are met, including the dismissal of the FBiH government and revision for all budget beneficiaries," said Safet Redzic, president of the Union of Disabled Veterans of War of BiH. 
 FBiH Minister for Veteran Issues Zahid Crnkic said "If the veterans' organisations think that [a] strike is the best solution, I can't prevent them," and added the government is "sticking with the decision that allowances for the disabled persons must be reduced". 
Per the agreement with the IMF, the FBiH government announced the adoption of the so-called Intervention Law to cut salaries and allowances for all budget beneficiaries to reduce its budget by almost 116m euros. FBiH also adopted a bill bringing public sector salaries and allowance payments back to December 2008 levels, plus an additional 10% deduction. 
Two-thirds of IMF funds are intended for the FBiH and one-third for Republika Srpska (RS). Both entities withdrew the first 200m-euro tranche from the country's central bank account in July. The remaining balance will be withdrawn following positive quarterly performance reviews from the IMF, a condition for future disbursements. 
In early September, FBiH Prime Minister Mustafa Mujezinovic told the EU that FBiH has met its commitments; RS reportedly also met its requirements. All commitments must be met by the country as a whole, or neither entity will get money. 
IMF Sarajevo Mission head Costas Christou says the IMF stand-by arrangement saved BiH from financial collapse. He explained that "this arrangement also allows access to money from other sources, the World Bank and the EU. The success of the stand-by arrangement and the meeting of its goals depend on full implementation of the agreement and the savings measures at all government levels in BiH." 
