08/04/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 08/04/05
About 75,000 Romanian children drop out of school every year, and 10 per cent of students in every generation never finish first grade. The dropout rate is high in gymnasiums and high schools, too -- about a fifth of all the pupils abandon school. Last year, authorities embarked on a major overhaul of the system, extending compulsory education to ten grades, from the previous eight. The new minister of education, Mircea Miclea, plans to go further, extending it to 12 grades. 
"I will promote this change. It's a trend in many European countries and we have to admit the competences necessary to live in the society of knowledge can't accumulate in ten years," he was quoted as saying by the Romanian daily Adevarul. 
The move is not without its critics. Some education experts say making pupils spend two extra years in schools will diminish, rather than boost, the quality of education. They cite the situation during the communist era, when students were kept in schools for 12 years whether or not they could comply with the requirements, simply to meet the directives handed down by the Ceaucescu regime. 
A longer education cycle, critics say, could lead to an increase in the already high dropout rate. 
"It's a nice idea, but probably the minister didn't think about the problems the educational system is confronting and about the difficulties many children have finishing ten grades," says Zoea Rotaru, the general school inspector in Arad county. "I don't believe the initiative could be put into practice in the present-day economic circumstances." 
Currently, the Romanian pre-university education system hosts about 3.6 million students and 260,000 teachers in about 18,000 schools and kindergartens. About 1,000 of these schools are adobe structures, while 2,800 have no water and 40 have no electricity. Over the last four years, the number of schools has decreased by 25 per cent. All of these factors, together with poverty and lack of interest in education, have contributed to the dropout rate. 
The previous extension of compulsory schooling has obliged many students in rural areas to travel to the nearest towns -- often on foot -- in order to attend ninth and tenth grades. The sudden rise in the numbers of students has caught many schools unprepared, experts say. 
The government, however, believes the long term benefits will outweigh the costs. According to Miclea, the numbers of students should eventually ease up due to the demographic drop that is expected to affect Romanian youth. 
Many parents appear to back the government's plans. A poll conducted by Gallup Romania and the Metro Media Transilvania for Education 2000+ Centre found that 48 per cent of respondents support the move to a 12-grade system. 
