10/01/2008
(Standart, Novinar - 10/01/08; Sofia Echo, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Vseki Den, Netinfo, BurgasNews - 09/01/08; Balkan Insight - 08/01/08; Sofia News Agency - 07/01/08)
Bulgarian environmentalists and human rights activists are planning to stage demonstrations during Russian President Vladimir Putin's two-day official visit to Sofia, beginning January 17th. 
 Different organisations have issued statements urging Bulgarians to join the protests against the Russian companies' involvement in major projects, such as construction of the Belene nuclear power plant and the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline. 
A committee on the preservation of the Burgas Bay sent a statement to the media Wednesday (January 9th), voicing concern about the lack of transparency surrounding Bulgaria's involvement in the 285km pipeline, meant to carry Russian oil to the Mediterranean. Bulgaria and Greece will each hold a 24.5% stake in the project, which is expected to begin construction this year. Russia will retain the controlling 51% stake in the pipeline. 
Worried about the potential negative impact the project could have on the region, greens have been calling for an environmental assessment. Both Bulgaria and Greece are located in a seismically active region. Local authorities in Burgas plan a referendum on the pipeline project on February 17th. 
During Putin's visit, the government plans to sign an agreement on establishing an international company to implement the project, the Burgas Bay committee said. 
"We are once again witnessing decisions being taken non-transparently and hastily and these decisions could have grave, even catastrophic, consequences," the committee said in its Wednesday statement. 
It followed an even stronger statement by the Anna Politkovskaya Association for Freedom of Speech, named after the Russian journalist and Putin critic who was murdered in 2006. 
"Putin is coming to Bulgaria to sign Bulgaria's total economic dependence on Russia," the human rights group claimed in a web-posted petition. According to the statement, the possible signing of agreements on the Burgas-Alexandroupolis, the Belene nuclear plant and other major projects would turn Bulgaria into a "Trojan horse" for the EU for the next 50 years. 
President Georgi Parvanov's office says Putin will attend celebrations marking the 130th anniversary of the Russo-Turkish war that ended five centuries of Ottoman rule in Bulgaria. Putin will also launch "The Year of Russia" in Bulgaria. In addition to Parvanov, Putin is scheduled to meet with Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev and Parliament Speaker Georgi Pirinski. 
This second visit to Bulgaria as Russian president is expected to take place amid tight security. 
