09/04/2013
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 09/04/13 
Serbia's parliament approved a law that would create a state registry of convicted pedophiles and convicted rapists, prohibit them from approaching schools and playgrounds and institute stricter penalties for those convicted. 
The law approved Monday (April 8th), is named "Maria's Law" after Maria Jovanovic, an 8-year-old girl who was assaulted and murdered in Stari Ledinci, Vojvodina, Serbia, three years ago. 
Maria’s father, Slobodan Jovanovic, submitted the draft law. 
"I'd like my child to be the last one after whom such a law will be named," Jovanovic, a locksmith, told SETimes. 
Slobodan Homen, representative of the opposition's Democratic Party, spoke in favor of the law. 
"It's important that the new law provides the option of controlling pedophiles and rapists after they have served their prison sentence, because it was proven that in 80 percent of cases they repeat the offense," Homen told SETimes. 
According to the law, pedophiles and rapists may be under police supervision and will be prohibited from coming near kindergartens, schools, and children's playgrounds. A special registry of convicted pedophiles will be created with DNA samples kept on file. 
The law also forbids courts from shortening the sentence of a convicted pedophile or release the criminal on parole. 
Olgica Batic, MP from the Christian Democratic Party of Serbia, also advocates chemical castration of pedophiles, although that isn't covered in the new law. 
"We think this measure is justified in such cases," Batic said. 
In 2012, 15 people were arrested in Serbia in a pedophilia operation called "Armageddon." Most suspects in the case found their victims online. 
The law is stronger than laws in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). There were about 50 cases of indecent assaults on minors in Republika Srpska over the past two years. In most cases the abuser is the father or another family member. Due to fear, shame and stigma, families and children often do not report such cases. 
Although criminal laws of Republika Srpska, the Federation of BiH and the Brcko District issue penalties for acts characterised as pedophilia from three months to 20 years in prison, punishment for perpetrators is usually mild. 
Psychologist Jasminka Dizdarevic, who contributes to Azra Magazin and other publications, said a sex offender database in the country should exist, available to citizens at large for their protection. 
"There's an assumption that such crimes could be repeated. So, there should be a public record of such persons, to ensure citizens know they live next to such persons. Once perpetrators are 'branded' in public, they'll think before repeating a crime," Dizdarevic told SETimes. 
In Romania, Senator Dan Voiculescu in 2012 initiated a law against pedophilia to increase penalties for crimes that threaten life, physical, and psychological integrity. In his blog he wrote in February 2013 that pedophilia, rape, and murder destroy destinies and can break apart an entire society 
Actions of Romanian police and other Romanian and foreign institutions continuously uncover child pornography and prostitution networks. Romania is known as the country from which many victims come from who are transported for exploitation abroad. 
Children living on the streets and children lacking parental supervision become easy pedophilia victims. 
Ana Lovakovic in Banja Luka and Gabriel Petrescu in Bucharest contributed to this story. 
 In your opinion, in addition to passing new legislation, what other social measures would reduce pedophilia? Use the comment forum below to add to the discussion.  
