02/06/2009
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje and Blerta Foniqi in Pristina -- 02/06/09
Macedonian ruling coalition partners VMRO-DPMNE and the mostly Albanian Democratic Union for Integration (DUI) denied a German news agency's claims that the coalition is in crisis. The trigger, reported DPA, was Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu's decision to cancel a scheduled visit last Thursday (May 28th). 
Sejdiu was invited by Macedonian counterpart Gjorge Ivanov on May 13th, but cancelled at the last moment saying the visit had been changed from "official" to "working", which doesn't involve state honours. 
Albanian opposition parties in Macedonia described that as a "humiliation" with "catastrophic dimensions". 
Some, like New Democracy MP Sulejman Rushiti, said the "tactics" are hindering "good neighbourly relations," but hoped that "there are still possibilities to fix the mistake." 
Finding itself squarely in the middle of the Serbia-Kosovo row, the Macedonian government issued a statement to ease the situation. "Macedonia was the very first state that found understanding for Ahtisaari's plan … which resulted … in the recognition of Kosovo's independence." 
The statement reiterated that Kosovo is a friend and a partner and expressed a desire to meet with Sejdiu. However, government spokesman Martin Martinovski indirectly unveiled Macedonia's dissatisfaction last week about border demarcation with Kosovo -- a key element in ensuring Macedonia's stability. Kosovo has been dragging its feet on the issue, according to Skopje. 
DUI leader Ali Ahmeti aided the effort by stating "it is in the interest of both states … to follow the example which we practiced thus far." He added his hope for "good will to prevail with both presidents so they can summon strength to co-operate in the interest of the citizens on both states". Ahmeti also denied that the DUI will leave the government, but urged Macedonia to establish diplomatic relations with Kosovo. 
Ivanov issued a statement lamenting Sejdiu's decision. "Relations between Macedonia and Kosovo have great potential and will intensify and deepen in the near future." Ivanov cautioned the leaders of the Balkan states, saying they "have a great responsibility to overcome all misunderstandings or inherited mistrust and to ensure a prosperous future". 
Kosovo's reaction was unanimous, hailing Sejdiu's decision as the best he has made since becoming president. Democratic League for Kosovo deputy chief Eqrem Kryeziu said Sejdiu's decision "shows that it [Kosovo] is a state like the others". Ahmet Isufi of Kosovo's Alliance of the Future added that "we are a state and will play as a state." 
The Kosovo press chatted about another Macedonian diplomatic gaffe; Sejdiu also was not invited to Ivanov's inauguration last month. 
Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski's reaction was markedly different. "It would be good to focus on good neighbourly relations", he said. "Scoring political points domestically at the expense of good neighbourly relations will not lead the region in the right direction." 
Gruevski called on all presidents and prime ministers in the region to act fairly and responsibly, as Serbian and Kosovo media outlets speculated on whether or not Macedonia would withdraw its recognition. 
