28/09/2010
(AP, World Bulletin, Zaman - 28/09/10; Hurriyet - 27/09/10; AFP, DPA, Hurriyet - 24/09/10)
Having won Turkish voters' backing for a package of constitutional changes in the September 12th referendum, Ankara is now seeking to secure a permanent ceasefire with the terrorist Kurdish Workers' Party (PKK). 
The government of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) was hoping to achieve that goal through intensified diplomatic efforts, involving the United States, Iraq, Iran and Syria, Turkish Interior Minister Besir Atalay said on Friday (September 24th). 
"Our determination to resolve the problems is ongoing," he told reporters during a joint news conference with German Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere in Ankara. "A new era has begun following the referendum." 
In 1984, the PKK began an armed campaign for self-rule in Turkey's Kurdish-dominated southeast. The fighting ended in 1999, but tension began mounting again three years ago due to a new surge in violent attacks against Turkish targets by members of the separatist group who had fled to northern Iraq after the 15-year conflict. The PKK is blacklisted as a terrorist organisation by Turkey, the EU and the United States. 
Its campaign against Ankara has claimed more than 30,000 lives. 
On August 13th, the militant group declared a "period of non-action" until September 20th, when it said it was extending the unilateral temporary cease-fire for one week. 
Turkish media reported on Monday that Ankara is working out a formula to convince the PKK to lay down weapons, as part of an action plan to fight the rebel group that Turkish, Iraqi and US officials agreed on back in April. 
According to the Turkish daily Hurriyet, the AKP government's first goal is to ensure an extension of the temporary ceasefire and then for the truce to become permanent. Finally, it wants to fix the problem once and for all through political steps at home. 
Turkish officials are expected to discuss their plans with the top US commander in Iraq, General Lloyd Austin, who arrived in Ankara on Tuesday, and is scheduled to hold talks with Atalay and Turkish generals. 
On Sunday, Atalay travelled to Arbil, the capital of the autonomous Iraqi Kurdistan region, to meet with Massoud Barzani, president of the regional administration. 
The visit, Atalay told reporters later, was part of Ankara's "multidimensional efforts" in the fight against terrorism. He also appeared optimistic about the future of co-operation between Turkey and Iraqi Kurds in dealing with the PKK. 
 According to Turkish media reports, Barzani has assured Atalay of his readiness to contribute to Ankara's new efforts to resolve the terrorism problem. 
Turkish intelligence chief Hakan Fidan, who recently visited the United States to discuss the PKK issue with officials there, is reportedly scheduled to travel to northern Iraq soon. 
The fight against terrorism was one item on the agenda when Atalay and de Maiziere met last week. They agreed on Friday that their countries would forge closer co-operation on security and counter-terrorism issues. 
"We are setting up a joint committee on counter-terrorism and security issues at once," said Atalay, who also handed his German counterpart intelligence on PKK activities. 
"Our intelligence agencies will compare their own information with that given to us," de Maiziere said. "We will see if there is new information and, if necessary, take action." 
