26/12/2011
By Aleksandar Pavlevski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 26/12/11 
Moody's Investors Service lowered the credit rating of the three biggest French banks -- Societe Generale, BNP Paribas and Credit Agricole -- on December 9th, increasing anxieties over the EU economic woes. 
The ratings agency said the banks could face further losses on their holdings of Greek and Italian government bonds should the crisis deepen. 
Many fear the added effect of these and other EU-based banksˈ exposure in Greece and elsewhere in the region on local banks and economies. 
Moody's explained the reasons behind the move are the worsening financing conditions and bank liquidity, as well as the unstable environment in which the European banks operate. 
Another credit agency, Standard & Poor's, warned that reducing EU membersˈ credit ratings may adversely affect the Balkans as debt levels continue to climb. 
"The possibility arises from the conviction that during the last several weeks, the systemic in the European monetary union has increased to a level which reflects negatively the credit rating of the eurozone as a whole," Standard & Poor's said. 
Regional economists say lowering credit ratings are not good news for any country because they signal to potential investors the loss of confidence and security. 
"It [also] worsens the conditions for borrowing and makes coming out of the recession more difficult. That concerns Croatia as well as Serbia, Bosnia Herzegovina, France and all the others," Mato Babic, economics professor of the Libertas Business School in Zagreb, told SETimes. 
Babic explained the lowering of credit ratings means increased costs, which in turn means an increase in the costs of borrowing, that is, higher interest rates. "The latter means lower investments and aggregate demand, which reduces production and increases unemployment." 
Banks in Croatia however, are well capitalised, Babic said, which means overall they have greater capital adequacy than the banks in the EU. "That is why Croatian banks are relatively stable and in hindsight will have no problems." 
Belgrade Institute for Economics Director Dejan Eric explained the lowering of the French banksˈ credit rating affects their global operations and thus their operations in the region. 
"Announcing the news itself means the level of credit risk is rising, which also brings with it 'reputational risk'. In the short-term that may not mean much, but if the credit rating decline continues, it can result in withdrawing of deposits and reducing crediting activities," he said. 
Eric said Serbia's banking sector and economy are not much affected. 
"Foreign banks in Serbia are registered as independent legal persons according to domestic laws -- a good thing. They are relatively immune to greater disruption in the country of origin. We already had a similar situation in 2008 when some "mother" banks to the domestic banks were in very serious trouble at home but that did not reflect in a greater measure to their "daughters" in Serbia," he said. 
Eric argues that lower credit ratings may have negative effect in the long term, if the problem with withdrawing deposits and reducing cross-border borrowing from the banks in their home countries occurs. But those have been taking place in the past several months. 
"Currently the greatest problem for these banks' regional offices is 'reputational risk' as they try to explain the lower credit rating of the central office will not affect much their business in Serbia." 
The trend to lower credit rating will very likely continue, says leading Macedonian economist Zhivko Atanasovski. 
"In a period of world economic crisis which is debt-based and characterised by huge public debts and weak public finances, it is to be expected that the agencies will lower the ratings of banks and countries. All this affects the value of the euro," Atanasovski told SETimes. 
Eric's optimistic outlook notwithstanding, Serbia's external debt in October was 24 billion euros, a billion more than the previous month, and the trend continues unabated. 
According to Skopje-based economic analyst Viktor Trufunovski, the lower credit ratings will affect the French banks' ability to issue credit, especially in countries like Greece in which they are most exposed. 
"The banks will have to increase the interest rates on the already issued credit. All the money the Greeks borrowed will have to be paid at a higher interest rate, while the government debt grows without taking new credits," Trufunovski said. 
Former Greek Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou had singled out the credit rating agencies in addition to the EU as responsible for the Greek crisis. 
Greece has the lowest -- or "junk" -- credit rating in the region, whereby the bonds it issues are extremely speculative and high-risk and the country can service its debt only if it improves the economic situation. 
"The EU had opportunities to finance part of the Greek debt due to the European banks, but will not be able to do the same with the other countries. That means the capital in the whole of Europe will be more expensive," Trifunovski said. 
"If the EU promises but does not save the risky countries from bankruptcy, then the lowered credit rating will be valid for the EU as a whole and not only for the states potentially facing bankruptcy," he added. 
One of the countries that may be potentially affected is neighbouring Macedonia, characterised by a mid-level credit rating. 
"Even though Macedonia belongs to the group of low-indebted countries, it must be careful not to take new credits and public spending. Any late payments of interest for whatever reason will directly impact Macedonia's credit rating," Economics Professor Vancho Uzunov told SETimes. 
National Bank of Macedonia Governor Dimitar Bogov however, noted that the state reserves are at an excellent level, the banking sector marks positive results and Macedoniaˈs public debt is among the lowest in the region. 
"We are expecting a hit but we are in a better position than in 2008; the economy has less imbalances than in 2008. Whatever scenario happens, the deposits of our citizens are safe. Regardless of whether they are in euros or denars, they will not lose in value," Bogov said. 
