09/12/2011
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 09/12/11
Euripides, a Greek writer of tragedy, said that, "Greeks know words [are] like daggers." Through millennia, Greek poets have used the peculiar power of a precise language to stir souls, plumb the depths of humanity, and stoke resistance against invaders and occupiers. 
Modern-day Greeks are turning to poetry readings in an attempt to rid their souls of the angst gripping many, as the country's economic catastrophe created waves of fear, leaving 500,000 citizens without an income, along with soaring suicide and homelessness rates. 
A recent event titled Crisis Poetry, at the National Library in Athens, drew a crowd of nearly 300. They listened to Greece's best-known modern poets, including Nanos Valaoritis, 90, a friend of Nobel Laureate poet George Seferis, and Titos Patrikios, reading their works. 
The event was organised by Dino Siotis, editor of Dekata, a periodical that aims to keep poetry alive and includes works by both famous and up-and-coming poets. 
"When the country entered the crisis, people became more aware of poetry and literature and want to hear what poets have to say," Siotis told SETimes. He served as a press officer in the United States where he was taught by Valaoritis -- at a time when Valaoritis gained even more renown and churned out works inspired by his loathing of the military rulers. 
Siotis is a well-known poet himself. His recent work, Black Money, is a searing attack on Greece's rich elite and the culture of corruption, cronyism and favouritism that marks society and helped create the crisis. 
"This is not a financial crisis. It's a moral crisis," said Siotis, adding that for this reason, poetry readings are drawing so many seeking relief from the weight of worry. 
Valaoritis, regarded as the most important poet of the Greek diaspora since Constantine Cavafy, has seen times even tougher than today, and recalls the dark days of World War II, the Nazi invasion, and people dying in the streets from hunger. 
"I had to walk over dead bodies every day during the German occupation, and there were horse-drawn wagons, like in the Middle Ages, filled with bodies; but even at that point, great poetry was produced, to help people cope," he told SETimes. 
At the time, poets such as Odysseas Elytis, another Greek Nobel Laureate, emerged, and the works of Cavafy and surrealist Andreas Embiricos were popular. 
"Greeks were poets in the worst time of our history," he said, including invasions by the Franks, Venetians, and the 400-year Ottoman occupation that finally ended in 1830. "What the poets have to give is very important. It keeps the morale of people going." 
Patrikios, who barely survived being killed by collaborators during WWII and was exiled to an island for three years after the Greek Civil War in 1946 because of his Leftist ideals, said he was glad so many showed up at the event. 
"Poetry can create this atmosphere that in present times is lacking. We live almost isolated; we don't communicate with others. Poetry can help us be conscious of things in a more profound way," he told SETimes. 
Its territory he has explored in some of his best-known poems, including Words Again, where he writes why people should not be silent. 
 Yet the unspoken words beneath the tongue the only ones that don't emerge from your mouth they too gnaw from within leaving shrivelled corpses of people who tried to speak when it was too late. 
If only for a time, the poetry reading made life a little easier before people had to return to the anxiety of wondering how to deal with pay cuts, tax hikes, slashed pensions and layoffs. 
Georgia Naka, a freelance translator, said she appreciates that the poets understand what was behind the country's dilemma and how much hurt it has caused. 
"The crisis isn't just financial, it's a crisis of values and aesthetics and I wanted to hear something different that would elevate your soul and make you think. Poetry makes the ugliness of society more beautiful," she told SETimes. 
Apart from a brief statement last year, the country's arts and literature society has been noticeably quiet during the crisis, prompting the newspaper To Vima to wonder what had happened to its vaunted reputation for speaking out. 
The vacuum was partially taken over by anarchists scribbling graffiti and throwing Molotov cocktails at the police, during the many protests, riots and strikes that have engulfed the land. 
"Regardless of the high standard of our modern poetry, its creators abstain from making an issue of miserable topics such as the impoverishment of a big number of people in the society," the paper said. 
Unlike the years of the junta and those that immediately followed, the economic crisis has not yet spawned another Yiannis Ritsos, Valaoritis, Cavafy, Elytis, Seferis or the like, although Siotis is trying to keep the tradition alive. 
In 1936, Ritsos, a Communist, in a celebrated work Epitaphios, took aim at a right-wing dictatorship and wrote lines that still resonate with the Greeks today: 
 Son, my flesh and blood, marrow of my bones, heart of my own heart,  sparrow of my tiny courtyard, flower of my loneliness.  
 Where did my boy fly away? Where's he gone? Where's he leaving me?  The bird-cage is empty now, not a drop of water in the fountain.  What ever made your dear eyes close and you are blind to my tears?  How are you frozen in your tracks and deàf to my bitter words? 
In 1978, he said, "I wrote the Epitaph at a time when all the intellectual movements around the world were creating diversions from tradition … as a fortification of our national, racial identity through purely folklore metres." 
In a poem called Snapshots, Siotis wrote lines that have become self-prophetic for Greeks. 
 There are times When the only thing you can Do is not to hope  
Naka said she understands, even while glad for the bright relief of poetry and those who write it. 
"They can't really do anything," she said. "It's just escapism." But for many Greeks, it's enough for now. 
