01/10/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 01/10/09
The Social Democratic Party (PSD) withdrew from Romania's ruling coalition on Thursday (October 1st) after one of its members was sacked from his post as interior minister. Prime Minister Emil Boc now heads a minority government, and will need parliament to green-light the appointment of any new ministers. 
Announcing his party's resignation, PSD head Mircea Geoana put the blame on President Traian Basescu. 
"Basescu is solely responsible for this difficult period in Romania," Geoana said, vowing that his party would never again accept a secondary role in a ruling coalition. Geoana will be facing off against Basescu in presidential elections set for November 22nd. 
The crisis was prompted by Boc's decision to fire Interior Minister Dan Nica over comments he made suggesting the elections could be marred by fraud. Many interpreted the remarks as a veiled accusation that Boc's Liberal Democrats were conspiring with Basescu to rig the vote. 
"Nica suggested someone is preparing an electoral fraud, a serious statement, lacking any grounds and which casts doubts over the legitimacy of the elections," Boc said. 
The PDL-PSD coalition had been in place since December. Although analysts say the breakup mostly reflects political strategising ahead of the presidential vote, the impact could be significant. Romania is under pressure to meet conditions set by the IMF for 20 billion euros in emergency aid, and the government collapse will make that task harder. 
According to Evenimentul Zilei, a Romanian daily, Boc has started negotiations on a new cabinet with the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians (UDMR), a smaller party defending mostly the interests of the Hungarian minority. 
Earlier on Thursday, President Basescu officially signed Nica's dismissal and appointed Vasile Blaga, an LDP member, as interim interior minister. During emergency talks Wednesday over the future of the ruling coalition, the president had urged Nica to resign voluntarily and forestall a government crisis. 
He also suggested that the replacement should be a political independent or a member of one of the opposition parties. Under the coalition deal signed between the PSD and PDL, however, it was agreed that the post should be held by the Social Democrats. 
Insisting he would not step down on his own accord, a defiant Nica said it was Basescu, not he, who should resign. Meanwhile, the PSD has cried foul over the choice of Blaga, alleging that he is deeply involved in Basescu's campaign. 
"The prime minister's decision is groundless, and the invoked arguments are mere political pretexts which hide Traian Basescu's direct political interest," Geoana said. 
Nica was the third Social Democrat to have been appointed -- and removed -- as interior minister this year 
