05/07/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 05/07/04
With the victory of reformist candidate Boris Tadic in last week's presidential election, Serbia has taken a major step towards EU and NATO integration. The outcome of the elections was welcomed by the EU and by the United States, which said it was eagerly awaiting co-operation with Tadic, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and members of the Serbian cabinet as they proceed with the reforms that were started in October 2000.
The European Commission (EC) said Tadic's victory is a sign that Serbia has decided to let go of the past. EC spokeswoman Emma Udwin said the Union will do all it can to help the people of Serbia proceed towards EU membership. But the election of a democratic president is only one step along Serbia-Montenegro's path. The state union still faces many challenges.
That fact was evident during EU Foreign Affairs Commissioner Chris Patten's visit to Belgrade in May. Patten struck a positive note, saying he wanted to see Serbia-Montenegro in the EU, but he also emphasised that further progress depends on steps taken by Belgrade and Podgorica.
"The EU cannot provide the political will for resolving the issue in Serbia-Montenegro if the will does not already exist," said Patten, who held talks with Kostunica and his Montenegrin counterpart, Milo Djukanovic, as well as with the president of the state union, Svetozar Marovic, during the visit.
"We want to see you get closer to the EU, but that is in your hands and the hands of your political leaders," Patten said.
The Union has set several conditions that must be met before the feasibility study on Serbia-Montenegro's EU integration can go ahead. The top priority is full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Harmonising the Serbian and Montenegrin economic systems and customs regulations is also considered of great importance, as is the implementation of all related regulations.
The issue of co-operation with the ICTY centres on the UN court's demand that Belgrade apprehend and extradite former Bosnian Serb army commander Ratko Mladic. Serbian authorities claim that he is no longer in Serbia and that he was last seen there in 2001. But ICTY chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte argues otherwise. Another point of contention is the Serbian government's failure to extradite four army and police generals indicted for crimes in Kosovo. They have announced that they will not turn themselves in voluntarily. Government sources say that they will be extradited now that the presidential election is over.
The second major obstacle to EU integration is the lack of a single Serbia-Montenegro market. Serbia and Montenegro do not have a common currency -- Montenegro has been using the euro instead of the dinar for two years. It will take years before the two republics can harmonise customs for 56 agricultural products, as the EU has demanded. Analysts say that the state union and the two member republics must pass as many as 80,000 regulations in order to bring their legislation into line with EU rules.
Moreover, the state union faces uncertainties about its status. The founding agreement gave citizens of the two member republics the right to decide, after three years, whether they want continue as part of a union or become independent. Montenegrin Premier Milo Djukanovic, who advocates independence, has made it clear that the referendum will go ahead. Until recently, not all bodies of the state union had been formed. Although a federal court was finally appointed, the country still lacks a flag and other state markings.
Representatives of the Serbian and Montenegrin governments have promised Patten that they will work swiftly on harmonising relations. According to Kostunica, as many as 17 key laws were adopted during his government's first 50 days in office.
Analysts in Serbia-Montenegro say the state union can get closer to EU membership only through hard and speedy work, and that the window of opportunity must not be missed. For the state union to enter in 2007, along with neighbouring Bulgaria, Romania and Croatia, it would have to complete the feasibility study successfully by the end of the year. A Stabilisation and Association Agreement would need to be in place by early 2005, and a joint currency would have to be established in the first semester. These are formidable tasks, especially considering that the state union does not have a ministry assigned to deal with European integration.
The consequences of remaining outside the EU were demonstrated at the Union's enlargement on 1 May. Due to lack of business regulations, Serbia-Montenegro will now be unable to continue exporting goods to the ten new member states. If the halt in trade lasts, it could deal a major blow to Serbia-Montenegro's already fragile economy.
