27/12/2006
(FT - 27/12/06; AFP - 25/12/06; Financial Mirror - 22/12/06; EUobserver - 21/12/06; AFP, AP, Sofia News Agency - 20/12/06; Sofia News Agency - 18/12/06; AP, Ireland Online, CTK - 30/11/06)
Bulgaria and Romania will join the EU on Monday (January 1st), raising the number of the bloc's member nations to 27. Despite their robust economic growth in recent years, incomes in the two Black Sea countries remain well below those in the other 25 states, making them the poorest in the club. 
Their entry on Monday will allow Bulgarians and Romanians to seek better paying jobs in other bloc countries -- but not just anywhere. Most of the 15 "old" EU nations (EU15) have announced restrictions. These will remain in place for between 12 and 24 months, after which they will be reviewed. 
Fearing a new major influx of migrant workers following the two Balkan nations' entry, Britain announced a set of measures in October, curbing the access of Bulgarian and Romanian jobseekers to its labour market. Shortly after that Ireland followed suit with similar restrictions. Along with Sweden, Britain and Ireland were the only EU member states to fully open their labour markets to migrant workers from the ten mostly former communist countries that joined the Union in May 2004. 
Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, the Netherlands, Portugal and Spain also have said they will introduce quotas or other work-permit systems. Alone among the EU15, Finland and Sweden have confirmed they will not impose limits. 
"We will not introduce any restrictions for workers from Bulgaria and Romania," the AFP quoted Swedish Justice Ministry spokesman Markus Friberg as saying earlier this month. "The effects of enlargement were extremely positive even if they were quite small," he added. 
Last week, Hungary became the first of the ten nations that joined the EU in 2004 to impose temporary restrictions on Bulgarian and Romanian jobseekers, saying it would open up its labour market to workers from the two countries "in phases". 
While free movement of workers is one of the fundamental EU principles, member states are allowed to impose temporary restrictions to protect their labour markets. All such measures must be dropped by January 2014 at the latest, though they will be under review well before that. 
With Bulgaria and Romania's entry, the EU population will grow by nearly 30 million, reaching about 490 million people. Downplaying fears within the Union, Sofia and Bucharest have both said they do not expect their countries' admission into the bloc to be followed by an exodus of jobseekers. 
A report in the Financial Times on Wednesday (December 27th) referred to Bulgarian Labour Minister Emilia Maslarova as citing an August survey, which showed that no more than 46,000 Bulgarians were seriously considering seeking a job abroad after January 1st. 
