14/03/2007
By Jonilda Koçi for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 14/03/07
Describing the move as a bid to galvanise Albania's reform process, Prime Minister Sali Berisha proposed a reshuffle of his cabinet Monday (March 12th). The changes, just weeks after the ruling Democratic Party (DP) suffered major losses in local elections, are also intended to broaden the ruling coalition and help ensure that it has the 84 votes needed when Parliament elects a president in June. 
Appointing Nard Ndoka, the head of Democratic Christian Party, as health minister means adding eight votes to the coalition's majority. 
Meanwhile, Gazmend Oketa was tapped to replace Deputy Prime Minister Ilir Rusmajli, who will take over the Justice Ministry from Aldo Bumci. Bujar Nishani succeeds Sokol Olldashi, who resigned from the Interior Ministry to run in the February 18th local elections. 
Majlinda Bregu will replace Arenca Trashani at the Ministry of European Integration and also takes the new post of government spokeswoman. Ylli Pango replaces Bujar Leskaj at the Culture Ministry. 
"With these changes, we aim to speed up the reform process," Berisha said, adding that the DP is preparing to go through "a reconstructing process". 
President Alfred Moisiu has seven days to decree the new members of the government, and Parliament will have to give the final approval within ten days. It is the first reshuffle since DP came to power after winning the July 3rd, 2005 parliamentary elections. It had spent eight years in opposition. 
Berisha's government now has support from 80 of the 140 deputies in Parliament, a number that falls short of the 3/5ths majority needed for some laws, including approval of a new president. 
The incumbent, Moisiu, was selected after a compromise between the majority and the opposition in 2002, leading Albanians to refer to him as the "consensual president". However, hopes of a similar deal this time around appear dim. 
Several days ago, Berisha proposed DP's Bamir Topi as a possible choice for president. "I think the president has to be a popular figure and I think that Topi is the most appropriate. He has a long political career to carry this duty," the prime minister said. 
However, the opposition balked, saying it can negotiate with the majority only if the prime minister resigns. 
Berisha says the time has come to consider having the people, rather than Parliament, elect the head of state. This, however, would require changes to the constitution. 
Albania is hoping for NATO membership next year and signed a Stabilisation and Accession Agreement with the EU last spring. 
Southeast European Times correspondent Erlis Selimaj contributed to this article. 
