26/11/2008
(Euobserver, EurActiv, FT, Times - 26/11/08; AFP, Reuters, AP, DPA, BBC, International Herald Tribune, Euobserver, BNT, Sofia Echo, Dnevnik, Mediapool, News.bg, Focus news Agency - 25/11/08)
The European Commission (EC) took an unprecedented step against an EU member state Tuesday (November 25th), depriving Bulgaria of 220m euros in funding for its persistent failure to tackle corruption and organised crime. It also warned Sofia that it could lose a further 340m euros, unless it takes urgent action. 
In July, the EC froze nearly 500m euros in aid to Bulgaria, citing continuing weaknesses in the country's control systems and cases of fraud and irregularity in a damning report. It also withdrew the accreditation of two government agencies handling funds under the PHARE pre-accession programme -- one under the finance ministry and the other under the regional development ministry. 
The EU has suspended a total of more than 800m euros in aid to Bulgaria since it joined the bloc in January 2007. Of that, 560m euros come under the PHARE programme, including the uncontracted 220m euros now irretrievably lost. Sofia could see the remaining 340m euros of contracted but unpaid aid by the end of 2009, if the EC decides to restore the two implementing agencies' accreditation before that. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn told reporters Tuesday that the EC was still unable to do that, as recent reviews had revealed new irregularities in addition to those outlined in the July report. 
"As they say, the man's gotta do what the man's gotta do," Rehn said in Brussels. "We have to play by the book and respect the rules of financial management." 
Announcing the EC's decision earlier Tuesday, commission spokeswoman Krisztina Nagy urged Bulgaria to act quickly to improve the management of EU funds. 
Reforms undertaken by Bulgaria this year have failed to bring about a tangible improvement in the management of EU money thus far, according to the EC. 
 "I recognise action plans have been set up and legislation has been revised; however, many of these measures are only a promise of future action and have not yet delivered concrete results," Rehn said. 
Tuesday's decision caught Bulgarian officials by surprise. Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev and his deputy in charge of EU fund management, Meglena Plugchieva, who were both in Berlin, criticised the EC, as they expressed their "disappointment". 
Stanishev complained the EU had not always given Bulgaria the treatment it accorded to other member states. Plugchieva vowed, though, that Bulgaria "will nevertheless ... strictly implement the European rules and procedures to guarantee the correct and transparent use of all European funds". 
Slamming the government for the loss of EU funds as the economic crisis begins to bite, right-wing opposition parties called for the cabinet's resignation and early elections. 
