11/07/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 11/07/05
It's been said that a prominent communist leader in ex-Yugoslavia once shouted "Stop that Reuters!" when the news agency ran a report that the authorities weren't happy about. Decades after, some in Serbia have a similar reaction to Natasa Kandic, the director of the Humanitarian Law Centre in Belgrade. 
Kandic founded the Centre in 1992 in order to promote human rights for all -- regardless of ethnicity -- and the rule of law. Those were unusual ideas at a time when the people of the former Yugoslavia were massacring each other and the Milosevic regime ruled in Belgrade. Even today, they still meet with resistance. 
She has been called a "lunatic" and "evil" by her detractors, spat on and threatened. But she presses on with what has been her mission for the last 15 years -- making it possible for victims to speak and collecting evidence and testimonies to be used in court against war crimes suspects. Her efforts are directed not only at Serb suspects but at all those involved in perpetrating atrocities during Europe's worst conflict since World War II. 
The 59-year old sociologist is responsible for making public a videotape showing the killing of six captured Bosniaks from Srebrenica. Speaking to SE Times, Kandic said the main goal in releasing the tape was to put pressure on Serbian police to arrest members of the Scorpions -- one of the Serb paramilitary units that committed war crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina as well as in Kosovo. 
The impact was dramatic. The same night Serbian TV stations broadcast the tape, authorities rounded up several ex-Scorpions members. 
One month later, Kandic says she's not sure that even now Serbia is ready to "digest" what its army and police did during the Balkan conflicts. 
"People thought that our country had nothing to do with it, although we see the police marks on the people that committed those killings on the tape. On the other hand, you could see then that all institutions had the same line -- defending the state institutions, but admitting that there are individuals who committed crimes," Kandic says. 
The release of the videotape followed on the heels of an earlier furor involving Kandic. The ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party sued her after she publicly alleged that its leader, Tomislav Nikolic, committed war crimes in the Croatian village of Antin. 
Those allegations prompted Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) to join up with the Radicals and Milosevic's Socialists and demand and end to what they called "an anti-Serbian campaign led by the NGO sector". 
DSS member of parliament Milos Aligrudic was among those who joined the chorus of derision, opining that "characters like Natasa Kandic shouldn't be a reason for distinguished parliamentary representatives to speak". 
The subject of his scorn, however, is a woman who has been honoured with dozens of international awards, including the Human Rights Watch Award in 1993, and the EU Democracy and Civil Society Award in 1998. Her name was also on Time magazine's list of 36 European Heroes in 2003. 
After NATO troops entered Kosovo in June 1999, she went to the province to see for herself what was happening there. While in Podujevo, she met witnesses who would later testify against Sasa Cvjetan and Dejan Demirovic, who were eventually found guilty of killing 14 Albanians and wounding six children in late March 1999. Cvjetan was sentenced to 20 years in prison. Demirovic is currently in detention in Canada. 
The Podujevo case is not unique. According to Kandic, many war crimes in Kosovo have "yet to be revealed", and many Serbs are unaware of the extent of the repression carried out by the Milosevic regime. The Humanitarian Law Centre will soon be transformed into a Documentation Centre which will sustain and update a large database of evidence, testimonials, Hague court hearings and sheets, and other materials. 
"I think that it’s very important to create a database which will serve not only journalists, prosecutors and other professionals, but future generations too," Kandic says. 
Meanwhile, she continues to receive e-mail threats. According to Kandic, it is not she, herself, who infuriates people, but her message. The explanation, she says, is simple. 
"Most of our people have been driven, by Milosevic, to a situation in which they feel and see themselves as accomplices, confederates. Milosevic did that by sending a message that in these wars 'we defended our people and our country'. People feel guilty and therefore have the urge to defend themselves," Kandic says. 
