12/04/2005
(Blic, Tanjug, UNMIK Media Monitoring - 12/04/05; AP, Beta, Radio B92, Tanjug, Kosovareport, UNMIK Media Monitoring - 11/04/05)
An international delegation arrived in Belgrade on Monday (11 April) to discuss the situation in Kosovo, ahead of an upcoming review of the progress the province has made in implementing a set of democratic standards. A positive assessment will set the stage for opening talks on Kosovo's final status, which is expected to happen later this year. 
The delegation is comprised of foreign ministry officials from the six countries in the so-called Contact Group for Kosovo -- Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States -- and EU representatives. 
 International envoys met top Belgrade officials on Monday, including Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic and Serbia's president and prime minister, Boris Tadic and Vojislav Kostunica. The meeting was also attended by Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic and the head of Serbia's Kosovo co-ordination centre, Nebojsa Covic. 
The Belgrade officials have reportedly told the delegation that Kosovo's multiethnic character had been "seriously jeopardised", and they insisted that the review of the province's progress in achieving the set of UN-endorsed standards in eight areas -- including rule of law, democratic institutions and human and minority rights -- should focus primarily on this issue. 
"Following the assessment of standards in Kosovo, the next step is the dialogue on the future status of Kosovo. A solution should be sought for a status that would be more than autonomy and less than independence," Serbian news agency Beta quoted Marovic's office as saying after the talks. 
Cautioning that "any secession would provoke unforeseeable consequences", Belgrade officials insisted that regional stability should be the determining factor in deciding Kosovo's future. 
The delegation traveled to Pristina on Tuesday for discussions with UNMIK Chief Soren Jessen-Petersen and Kosovo Albanian and Serb leaders. 
Ahead of the international envoys' arrival, Jessen-Petersen commended the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) on Monday for accepting minority groups into the organisation -- implementing one of the key benchmarks outlined in the Standards for Kosovo document. 
Former Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic said Monday that the International Commission on the Balkans (ICB), of which he is a member, has prepared a report on Kosovo, envisioning a four-phase transition towards final independence. 
The ICB recommends that Kosovo become independent from Serbia in 2005 or 2006, but not as a fully sovereign state. During that period, the group believes, Kosovo should remain an international protectorate, but of the EU, not of the UN. 
