19/04/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 19/04/13 
Hockey Without Borders, an NGO from Montreal, Canada, aims to connect sport and culture, and promote reconciliation and cross-border relations. 
The NGO sends coaches abroad to organise grassroots initiatives, and sends equipment to underfunded hockey communities around the world. 
A few years ago, Fred Perowne, a Canadian hockey player, came up with the idea of Hockey Without Borders. He played for the Serbian professional league in the early 2000s and brought along several other Canadians to help out with the idea. 
In Serbia, the NGO started its program in 2011, and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Turkey were next to join the programme. 
Currently, 25 Canadian coaches live in Subotica, Serbia (three), Sarajevo (two) and Ankara (20), teaching hockey, cross-border co-operation and cultural understanding. 
"The NGO coaches support partners who make an effort to promote cross-cultural reconciliation. In both BiH and Serbia, the coaches work with children and youths from different cultural backgrounds, bringing them together in mutual respect, collaboration and teamwork, creating shared experiences, crucial in reconciliation," Paul Faucette, a member of the NGO board of directors, told SETimes. 
The organisation's teammates in Serbia are part of the Spartak hockey team. 
"It's so beneficial for our team to have inside players and coaches from the country with such a tradition. It's an opportunity for our players to meet their culture, habits, but also learn some English. Although our junior players don't speak English it's interesting to watch their, almost, perfect communication," Uros Brestovac, the NGO's co-ordinator for Europe and the Spartak team coach, told SETimes. 
Brestovac said that although Subotica is a multinational city, the NGO programme has still improved interethnic understanding. 
Canadian coaches are training 100 children in Sarajevo, which encourages Adnan Mrkva, captain of the Sarajevo Wolves, to think that hockey is returning to the Balkans. 
"Through the programme Hockey Without Borders, we connected with the team from Subotica; the children travelled, socialised, practically lived together. Ice is back again, and we've done a good thing with our colleagues from Canada who helped us a lot," Mrkva told SETimes. 
In Ankara, the programme is run with the help of the local police academy hockey club. 
Kaan Budak, the Turkish representative of the NGO and the head coach at Ice Hockey Coach, became involved in the project last year after his contact with Brestovac. 
"We're not interested in politics, political conflicts of the past or current events. Sport is above political conflicts and its disagreements," Budak told SETimes. 
Can Acar, 23, a university student and a hockey player on the Turkish team, said the project is important because of its originality in gathering four nations around athletics. 
"I believe that Canadian, Serbian, and Bosnian players and coaches will give us great added value to perfect our hockey skills. So, the project is not only about sports, but also establishing personal contacts and creating sports networks to expand our horizons. In a way, we are off the shelves and have started socialising," he said. 
Next season, the NGO plans to include hockey players from Bulgaria, Croatia and Slovenia. 
"Countries and communities are coming together through sport, countries are reconnecting through hockey, and it's nice to see this, the point of it all. It could be said that this programme is starting to build bridges again," Justin Rudick, a Canadian coach in Subotica, told SETimes. 
 Correspondents Menekse Tokyay in Istanbul and Drazen Remikovic in Sarajevo contributed to this report.  
 Will Hockey Without Borders make a difference in Southeast Europe and Turkey? If so, should there be more initiatives like this one? Let us know what you think.  
