10/01/2005
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 10/01/05
Newly-elected Romanian President Traian Basescu jolted the country's political landscape last week by saying that he favoured immediate early elections. In his first press interview since taking office, Basescu told the influential daily Adevarul, that a new vote would strengthen the ruling coalition, which currently depends on a former ally of the Socialist Party (PSD) for parliamentary support. 
With his remarks, Basescu -- already known for his provocative style -- demonstrated his intention to follow through on campaign promises to be an "active, involved president," analysts say. That marks a contrast to Basescu's predecessors, Ion Iliescu and Emil Constantinescu, who favored a behind-the-scenes approach. 
The president's comments were aimed primarily at the Humanist Party (PUR), which had been part of Prime Minister Adrian Nastase's political alliance during the recent presidential and parliamentary vote. It later supported Nastase and another Socialist leader, Nicolae Vacaroiu, in their bids to become speakers of the Romanian Chamber of Deputies and Senate, respectively. However, the party -- which has 30 members in parliament -- subsequently switched sides, enabling Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu to form a coalition government. 
The PUR must demonstrate that it is a "loyal ally of the Alliance," Basescu said, calling on the party to back replacing Nastase and Vacaroiu with MPs from the Justice and Truth Alliance. Leaders of the Alliance have made similar calls in recent days. 
Responding to Basescu's interview, PUR leader Dan Voiculescu has said the party would consider leaving the coalition government. He also vowed to continue supporting the Socialist leaders as chairmen of the two parliamentary chambers. The PSD, meanwhile, said it welcomed the possibility of early elections, stressing that it would not form an alliance this time with the PUR. 
In his interview, Basescu also called on the two members of the Justice and Truth Alliance -- Tariceanu's Liberals and the Democrats, formerly led by Basescu -- to "merge in a single party". He also urged parliament to conduct an inquiry into allegations of fraud which marred the recent elections. 
While saying that he preferred early elections, Basescu tempered his comments by noting that they should only be held in "emergency cases". 
"Since we are not in such a situation, it must not be provoked as long as the government can achieve its goals," the president said. 
