02/03/2012
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 02/03/12 
When Serbia signed the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU before the parliamentary elections in April 2008, officials in Belgrade did not expect four years to pass before candidate status was granted. 
The ruling coalition, led by Serbian President Boris Tadic, laid accelerated European integration down as a goal, but Kosovo -- which Belgrade considers a province of Serbia despite it having declared independence in February 2008 -- posed a problem on Serbia's path. 
Serbia removed the last obstacle to the candidacy just hours before the EU decision on Thursday (March 1st). 
Serbian and Romanian officials reached an agreement concerning the Vlach minority in Serbia, which was sufficient for Bucharest to withdraw its conditions for Belgrade. The details of the agreement, which covers about 30,000 people living in communities along the Romanian border, have not been disclosed. 
The European Council President Herman Van Rompuy announced the decision. 
"I hope it will encourage Serbia to undertake further efforts in order to meet the political and economic criteria for EU membership. It is also my hope that Belgrade will continue to support regional co-operation and good neighbourly relations in the Western Balkans," he said. 
Serbian officials welcomed the status. Tadic said that the candidacy would "open the door" for economic progress, but that there is a "lot of work" ahead of Serbia regarding future steps towards the EU. 
"Serbian citizens have filed the largest burden of reforms in order to make our country more democratic, legally regulated society which respects human and minority rights," Tadic said. 
Laslo Varga, the president of the Serbian Parliament's European Integration Committee said, the decision is a message to the international community and foreign investors that Serbia is "on the way to becoming an orderly European country". 
"Besides this, candidate status will stop the trend of declining support for joining the EU in the country, and will also open up new opportunities to use money from European pre-accession funds," Varga told SETimes. 
However, Vladimir Radomirović from the Centre for Strategic Alternatives said that Serbia will not get much from the candidacy itself, because the money from European funds can only be used for specific kinds of projects. 
"Serbia has gained practically nothing from EU candidate status, just like Macedonia and Montenegro have received nothing. Candidate status cannot fix the bad economic situation and it cannot prevent political corruption," Radomirović told SETimes. 
Not all parties in Serbia think that joining the EU is a good concept. 
Former Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Koštunica's opposition Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) said that it would be best for Serbia to proclaim political neutrality, stop European integration and nurture solely economic relations with the Union. 
DSS Spokesperson Petar Petković told SETimes that Serbia has lost more than 500m euros by implementing the SAA. 
"Instead of losing out because of EU membership, Serbia -- through political neutrality -- should forge developed economic co-operation with all countries in the world," said Petković. 
Receiving a date for the start of EU accession talks is the next step on Serbia's path, and everyone agrees that this means new, difficult compromises. 
Varga believes that is realistic to expect that date to be set in December for Serbia, both because of the difficult tasks ahead and because of the economic problems inside the EU itself. 
"Belgrade will be asked to fulfil all agreements with Pristina, and there is also the demand that institutions in northern Kosovo are abolished. I don't think our next step towards the EU will be easy," said Varga. 
Radomirović agrees. 
"According to statements by EU officials, Serbia can receive a date for the start of talks in December. Until then, the leading EU countries will surely demand that Belgrade continues to act constructively towards Kosovo, i.e. to abolish Serbian institutions, particularly those in northern Kosovo." 
Citizens also have differing thoughts on Serbia's EU candidacy. 
Belgrade trader Milovan Brkić, 33, said the candidacy is good news. 
"We are closer to the EU, that can only be good both economically and politically," he told SETimes. 
Lawyer Milena Srdić, 30, disagrees. "Will we now live better? Have bigger wages, more work? I don't believe we will, the EU itself has large financial problems," she said. 
With the granting of candidate status, Serbia has caught up with Macedonia and Montenegro, who have had candidate status since 2005 and 2010. Croatia should become a member of the Union in mid-2013, while Bosnia and Herzegovina signed the SAA in 2008. The Union gave the green light this week for a feasibility study to be done for Kosovo. 
