03/10/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 03/10/05
Albania was the host last month of joint maritime crisis response operations by NATO and partner countries, aimed at co-ordinating efforts in the fight against terrorism and smuggling. 
Troops from NATO members France, Greece, Italy, Romania, Slovenia and Turkey were joined by Albania, Azerbaijan, Croatia, Georgia and Jordan for the "Co-operative Engagement 2005" exercises, held from 12 September to 23 September in Vlora Bay, 140km southwest of Tirana. Some 1,500 troops participated. 
The exercises included co-ordination of land, air and sea operations and methods of public communication. The overall goal, according to a NATO press release, was to test the Alliance's ability to integrate multinational partner forces into NATO-led operations. 
"The exercises aim to stabilise the situation in a fictitious country, mainly by stopping arms smuggling, preventing extremist/terrorist involvement and controlling the illegal passage to that country. The exercises are designed to practice and assess interoperability standards between participating NATO and partner forces," said Albanian Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu. 
Albania has small peacekeeping military units in Afghanistan, Iraq and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Along with Croatia and Macedonia, it is a member of the "Adriatic Charter" -- an initiative designed to boost the efforts of all three countries to achieve NATO membership. 
"Co-operative Engagement 2005" began just days after indications from Brussels and Washington that the process of NATO enlargement would likely be delayed until 2008. The Adriatic Charter countries, which were left out of NATO's historic 2004 expansion, had been pressing for membership invitations by the end of 2006. 
"We believe defining a later term and giving these countries a chance to improve their performances is a real opportunity for them to become much stronger candidates," US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Kurt Volker said on 8 September. Backing the US stance, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer noted that enlargement is "related to meeting certain criteria, as is also required for EU membership". 
Co-operative Engagement 2005 is a "sign that our country is working seriously to meet the requested standards", Mediu said, adding that he remains optimistic about Albania's NATO prospects. 
Albania, Croatia and Macedonia have each entered into "membership action plans" with NATO. Under the plans, their membership bids depend on their capacity to fulfil their commitments to defence reform and democratisation. 
The 3 July parliamentary elections in Albania were viewed as a major test of the country's adherence to democratic standards. The new government headed by former President Sali Berisha won the elections on a platform that stressed anti-corruption efforts and Euro-Atlantic integration. 
