24/04/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 24/04/09
The Kosovo government announced last week that June 30th is the return-to-work deadline for all suspended Kosovo Serb police officers who are on the payroll. Approximately 300 Serb officers have refused to serve under the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) chain of command. They walked out after Kosovo's February 17th 2008 declaration of independence. The striking officers consider UNMIK their commanding authority and have asked the international community to put UNMIK officers in charge of police stations in Kosovo's Serb-dominated areas. 
The KPS is still paying the striking officers in hopes they eventually will resume work under KPS authority. "The decision to continue with the paid suspension was a political decision … because we wanted to express our readiness for their return," Radio Free Europe quoted Interior Minister Zenun Pajaziti as saying. 
 Last week's government decision stems from the recommendations of a working group -- composed of Kosovo and EULEX representatives -- set up to address the issue. EULEX previously tried unsuccessfully to work with the Belgrade authorities to resolve the matter. 
Pajaziti presented the working group recommendations to the joint Rule of Law Co-ordination Board. Its co-chairs are Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuci and EULEX chief Yves de Kermabon. 
"[T]he government has taken the decision to give until 30 June 2009 to all suspended officers to return to work", stated a joint government-EULEX press release. 
Kuci said the deadline decision should not be seen "as a punishment of these officers, but a concrete step … to rebuild a fully multi-ethnic police service that will reflect Kosovo society and work in the interest of all communities". 
 Kosovo authorities will intensify their efforts "to encourage all police officers who had left to return to the Kosovo Police", added Pajaziti. De Kermabon pledged EULEX's support but underlined "the need to approach this issue in a friendly manner". 
 Parliament's Commission for Internal Affairs and Security also addressed the issue last week. The panel will visit the Kosovo police next week and recommends a parliamentary debate if the Kosovo Serb officers do not return to work. 
The solution to this issue should come within the scope of the law, but Pristina should not forget that the "Kosovo institutions have done enough to have the police officers return to their workplace," the commission said in a statement. 
The panel also noted there are enough young Serbs willing to work for the KPS. 
 "Tolerating a boycott, at the same time, means those who want to work are not given the chance to work," the commission said. 
