15/11/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 15/11/05
The heads of state of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro met in Sarajevo on 7 November to discuss improving inter-state relations within the "Dayton Triangle". The occasion was the 11th session of the Igman Initiative, an umbrella movement bringing together 140 NGOs from the three countries. 
"Ten Years After Dayton -- Next Steps of Co-operation" was the theme of the session, which concluded with a joint statement recommending changes to the 1995 Dayton Agreement that ended the interethnic conflict in BiH. Plans for Croatian President Stipe Mesic, Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic and BiH presidency member Sulejman Tihic to sign it, however, fell through when the Bosnian Serb side raised objections to the text. 
The office of Borislav Paravac, the Bosnian Serb member of the tripartite presidency, issued a strongly worded statement complaining that the resolution presented "political stands on BiH's future, which are completely unrealistic and do not express the will of all peoples, and practically represent absolute termination of BiH's constitutional structure". 
According to the Igman resolution, the Dayton Agreement addressed a specific situation at a time that has now passed, and changes are needed to build a "lasting and just peace". 
"The Agreement has earned its place in history and we should not waste time debating whether it needs changes or not," the draft statement read. "The realities of daily life have outgrown the Agreement, so we need to seek new forms and frameworks for a more adequate, functional and contemporary approach to the needs of the BiH citizens and the new political realities," it added. 
Although the session ended without a signing ceremony, it provided an opportunity for the attending heads of state to reaffirm their commitment to building ties. Marovic and Mesic both voiced their desire to see a stable, functional and multiethnic BiH in the post-Dayton period. The leaders agreed that any changes to Dayton must come from within BiH itself. 
"The Dayton Agreement was the only possible solution at that time," said Mesic. "But it is not a good basis for establishment of permanent peace and stability, because it accepted some aims that were fulfilled through the war." 
"Dayton has to be examined by citizens and the institutions of BiH and its entities," said Marovic. 
The Igman Initiative was inspired by a group of intellectuals who braved the violence of the BiH conflict to travel to Sarajevo via the Igman Mountains, in a show of solidarity with the capital's besieged population. In 2000, intellectuals launched the first session of the initiative in Banja Luka with a call for co-operation and friendship among the countries -- a move that put them far ahead of the governments then in power. 
