22/03/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 22/03/12
Republika Srpska (RS) President Milorad Dodik reopened the possibility of a referendum in the entity last week -- this time on NATO membership. 
Although some say that this is a marketing ploy for the upcoming October elections in BiH, the fact remains that the majority of RS citizens remain negatively inclined towards membership in the Alliance. 
"The Serbs had a very negative experience with NATO. Nonetheless, we are determined to work hard at establishing good relations with the Alliance, but we have also determined that when the time of the final decision to join NATO comes, we should give people a chance to say in a referendum what they think about it," Dodik told Sarajevo's TV1 Television on March 14th. 
Opposition parties in RS back the entity referendum, while parties from Federation of BiH emphasize that the issue is a state-level matter. 
Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) deputy Aleksandra Pandurevic said that the referendum should be set as required by law -- a controversial law that RS adopted in 2010.
"We believe that citizens must decide whether [the entity] will join a military alliance such as NATO, like its done in all democratic and developed countries. Our attitude is that BiH should be militarily neutral," Pandurevic told SETimes. 
Much of the citizens' opposition stems from the NATO action in September 1995, when the alliance bombed the defense systems of the RS Army. The action was in retaliation for the RS forces bombing of Markale marketplace in Sarajevo, where 68 people were killed. 
In addition, from March to June 1999, NATO took military action against the former Yugoslavia after then President Slobodan Milosevic refused to sign the Rambouillet Agreement -- which eventually ended the war in Kosovo. 
Slobodan Popovic, vice-president of the Social Democratic Party (SDP) believes that the issue of NATO membership is the state issue. 
"[It is in] our strategic interest to do everything in order to be accepted in the Alliance. I think the story of a referendum is used for the purposes of daily politics since the referendum in the RS has already been announced several times, but has never taken place," Popovic told SETimes. 
BiH accepted the Action Plan for NATO membership (MAP) in April 2009, but conditionally, because the status of the country's military property is still unresolved. 
Milos Solaja, director of the Center for International Relations in Banja Luka -- an NGO which deals with political analysis -- said that the main political forces in RS has formulated its attitude about NATO with the official position of Serbia, which is distrustful of an alliance. 
"If the referendum is held now, NATO would definietly not have support in RS. However, I think it will take years until BiH finds itself in front of the NATOs doors. Until then, a lot can change," Solaja told SETimes. 
A poll by Banja Luka marketing agency Prime Comunications in November 2011 confirms the distrust of NATO that prevails among the citizens of RS. Joining NATO is suppored by only 26% of the population, while 55% oppose Alliance membership. About 19% are undecided. 
On the other hand, citizens of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina support idea that BiH should join NATO by 81%, while only 12% are against joining the Alliance. 
When it comes to the total score, 59.7% of BiH's population support joining NATO, while 28.8% of citizens oppose the idea. Every tenth respondent -- or 11.1% -- remain undecided on the issue. Bojan Vlaski, 27, a lawyer from Banja Luka, said that NATO has taken action against Serbs twice, and therefore BiH should not become a member. 
"I fully support the initiative for a referendum and I am sure that the RS citizens will vote against NATO. It would be totally immoral that RS support the one military alliance [that has] bombed and killed innocent people and civilians," Vlaski told SETimes. 
