29/08/2005
(HINA - 28/08/05; VOA, SEE Security Monitor, HRT - 27/08/05; AP, AFP, HINA, SEE Security Monitor, Transitions Online - 26/08/05)
A bill endorsed by the Slovenian government last week has met with sharp criticism from Croatia. The measure, which envisions the establishment of an ecological zone and an epicontinental shelf in the contested Piran Bay in the Adriatic Sea, was adopted by the government Thursday (25 August) and submitted to parliament for approval. 
In a protest lodged the same day, Zagreb described the move as a "politically damaging decision", which contradicts previous agreements stating the two countries would seek "good-neighbourly relations on the basis of full mutual confidence, friendship and co-operation".
Croatian government spokesman Vlatko Macek said the Slovenian decision is groundless legally, as the country -- whose Adriatic coastline is only about 20km long -- does not have free direct access to international waters unless it passes through Italian or Croatian territorial waters. 
The move "represents territorial aspirations towards Croatia," Macek said. 
In a further sign of protest, Zagreb recalled its Ambassador to Slovenia Marijo Nobilo for consultations, and summoned Slovenian Ambassador to Croatia Peter A. Bekes for an explanation. 
The new development comes less than three months after the two countries' governments held a joint session on the Brijuni Islands on 10 June. They agreed to try to prevent incidents in the Piran Bay and to avoid making any unilateral moves, pending a resolution of their border dispute. 
What appears to have prompted the new Slovene bill is the Croatian government's recent negotiations with Italy on demarcation of the continental shelf in the Adriatic Sea. Slovenia was not invited. However, Croatian authorities insist the only purpose of the talks was to clear up details related to a 1968 agreement between the former Yugoslavia and Italy. 
The latest development has sparked new calls from both sides that a solution to the territorial dispute be sought through the arbitration of the International Court of Justice in The Hague. In a commentary published Sunday, the leading Slovenian daily Delo said there was no reason why Slovenia should keep postponing international arbitration on its border with Croatia. 
Similar comments came from Croatia's Democratic Centre Party. "The problem of demarcation of the border with Slovenia should be resolved through international arbitration," the party said Sunday, describing such an avenue as "the only proper instrument for resolving the issue". 
Meanwhile, Croatia could take steps within the coming days towards the establishment of a temporary fishing regime in the Piran Bay, which would also include a buffer zone along the demarcation line to avoid incidents between Slovene and Croatian fishermen, HINA reported, quoting an unnamed senior Croatian diplomat. 
