06/10/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 06/10/11
Voicing protest over legislation they call discriminatory, Hungarian leaders have said their country will reconsider its support for Serbia's entry into the EU. 
"We are most devoted to Serbia's European integration, but accession is not realistic with laws that collectively deny people their civic rights," Hungarian Deputy Prime Minister Zsolt Semjen said ON Sunday (October 2nd) during a visit to Subotica, a northern Serbian town that is home to a large ethnic Hungarian population. 
At issue is a law adopted by the Serbian parliament last week on the restitution of seized property and damages. Passing such legislation is a condition for EU integration. 
However, one provision in the law stipulates that property confiscated from members of World War II occupation forces and their heirs will not be returned to them. 
Hungarian parties in Serbia say the measure is unfair because it affects even those Hungarians who were mobilised against their will, or who did not commit any crimes. 
"We are convinced that the law, by ignoring the principle of individual responsibility, violates several provisions of the constitution and is not in line with European principles," said Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians President Istvan Pastor, a member of the ruling coalition in Serbia. He said he would call for an assessment of its constitutionality. 
Semjen, meanwhile, urged Serbia to amend "the unacceptable parts of the Restitution Law, to enable compensation to the Hungarian community as well". An estimated 350,000 Hungarians live in Serbia. 
In response, Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic told SETimes that Serbia is against collective guilt, but did not want anyone to forget who had been against fascism during World War II. 
Djelic also said the Serbian authorities would aim to convince the Hungarian community that the law does not impose collective guilt, but pointed out the current makeup of parliament lacks the will to amend the law. 
Nenad Canak, leader of the League of Social Democrats of Vojvodina, took a blunter tone. "If we are choosing between the EU and rehabilitating those who murdered our fellow citizens and threw them into the frozen river, then we will think carefully. We will think about what kind of an EU that is and whether we want to join it at all," Canak said. 
EurActiv website editor Smiljana Vukojicic told SETimes that on October 12th, Serbia will probably obtain candidate status from the European Commission. 
"However, all members need to agree to that in December. That is where Hungary can block Serbia and there have already been cases of candidate countries blocked in progress towards the EU due to bilateral disputes with EU member states," she said. 
Tensions are also running high because of several physical clashes between the Serbs and Hungarians in the mixed village of Temerin. Dinko Gruhonjic of the coalition of NGOs Civic Vojvodina believes those incidents are unlikely to escalate. 
"Incidents increase before an election and when tensions are high in the region. The incidents in Temerin should not be overestimated, but the absence of a broader move to prevent their causes will result in ethnic communities living next to each other rather than with each other," Gruhonjic told SETimes. 
