01/04/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 01/04/13 
The conviction of two former top Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Serb officials by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia drew criticism from Serbia, but BiH victim's groups said the verdict was fair. 
Mico Stanisic and Stojan Zupljanin were sentenced to 22 years to prison for crimes against humanity, including acts of murder, torture, unlawful detention, deportation and plunder in various parts of BiH in 1992. 
Stanisic served as the Republika Srpska (RS) interior minister, and Zupljanin was a senior security official in charge of Banja Luka area. 
A BiH court sentenced Zoran Babic, Milorad Skrbic, Dusan Jankovic and Zeljko Stojnic, former RS policemen, before and after the war, to 86 years imprisonment in December 2010 for the crimes. 
The Hague ruling stated that the two took part in a "joint criminal enterprise with the objective to permanently remove non-Serbs from the territory of a planned Serbian state" at the time. 
The verdict was condemned by RS representatives of war associations and political officials. 
"With this judgement, The Hague proves it did not change its earlier policy towards the Serbs. They prove, once again, their intention to blame the Serbs responsible for everything. We all know how many crimes were committed against the Serbs, but, unfortunately, there is still no justice for those people," Nedeljko Mitrovic, president of the RS Organisation of Families of Captured, Killed Soldiers and Missing Civilians, told SETimes. 
Others disagree. 
"It is good this judgment was passed, especially since it points to Serbia's involvement in the war in Bosnia, because these charges are, in some way, part of the indictment against Slobodan Milosevic. Relations between BiH and Serbia are still low, and to improve them is much work," Sonja Biserko, director of the Belgrade Helsinki Committee for Human Rights, told SETimes. 
Biserko said that accepting the verdicts can help the reconciliation process between the two countries, but officials need to foster the will to do so. 
"Serbia needs to confront these judgments. Unfortunately, there is no political will for it, and all improvements in the relationship are done under pressure from the EU and the international community," she told SETimes. 
Murat Tahirovic, president of the BiH War Camp Prisoners Association, said that the victims are pleased with the verdict. 
"This is definitely a positive decision of The Hague tribunal and we hope the appeals chamber of court will not reverse this judgement. These men are responsible for mass killings and torture. It's good that the court proved this as a joint criminal enterprise, because it shows that top police officials knew what was happening on the ground during the war in Bosnia," Tahirovic told SETimes. 
Stanisic turned himself over to the court in 2005. Zupljanin, former police chief in the northwestern Bosanska Krajina region, was arrested in 2008 in Budva, Montenegro, after more than nine years on the run. 
The crimes for which they were convicted took place in 20 municipalities across BiH, the verdict stated. During the trial that lasted 365 days, 199 witnesses testified and more than 4,000 pieces of evidence were presented. 
Zupljanin and Stanisic are among 163 people sentenced by the ICTY for war crimes in the former Yugoslavia, mostly crimes committed in BiH between 1991and 1995, and mostly by top police and political officials. 
According to official ICTY estimates, about 100,000 people lost their life during the war in the 1990's in BiH. 
Do you think the ICTY sentence for Stanisic and Zupljanin is just, and why? Leave your comment below to join the debate. 
