02/01/2007
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 02/01/07
The free market system, driven as it is by the profit motive, is sometimes portrayed as being intrinsically valueless and amoral. Yet there is a strong tradition that links capitalism to ethical behavior, seeing the latter both as a check on excesses and as necessity for achieving success in the marketplace. It is sometimes forgotten that Adam Smith, widely regarded as the father of economics, also authored "The Theory of Moral Sentiments", and that Max Weber, the famous sociologist, connected hard work and moral values with the advance of capitalism in the western world. 
In the wake of the Enron, Worldcom, Parmalat and other scandals, renewed attention was paid to the ethical underpinnings of a sound market economy. In Romania, too, a series of business scandals -- linked with privatization deals and the regulation of markets -- have captured the attention of the Romanian public. Evidence of shady dealing and other malfeasance has angered many people, leading some to suggest that Romanians as a whole are hesitant about embracing capitalism. This line of reasoning, however, is one-sided, over-simplistic and misleading. It is one thing to suggest that people crave a more decent form of capitalism, and quite another to say they disdain capitalism altogether. 
Capitalism's undeniable virtues enabled it to win the ideological battle with communism and the command system. In terms of resource allocation, market-set prices and the ability to calculate costs and benefits transparently, a market economy has clearcut advantages. But there is more to the story. Capitalism cultivates a particular virtue: entrepreneurship. As industrious as managers and policymakers may be, it is often a different figure -- the entrepreneur -- who is best able to identify major new opportunities and capitalise on them. 
Hayek, Kirszner, Rothbard, Schumpeter and the Austrian School in general have made an essential contribution to explaining the role of entrepreneurship in economic development. Without entrepreneurs and their blend of visionary and practical thinking, progress would be much slower. Consider what Bill Gates has meant in the history of Microsoft Corporation and even the IT industry as a whole, or the way a team of gifted managers at Nokia have turned the Finnish firm into a star of the world telecommunications industry. 
However, such figures share the marketplace with far less honourable sorts. And capitalism itself comes in a variety of forms, not all exemplary. In many Latin American countries, for instance, it has been accompanied by oligarchs, extreme income polarisation, civil unrest and occasional outright warfare, as well as frequent breaches of civil liberties. In Asia, a statist form of capitalism puts its imprint on domestic politics, which typically has an authoritarian bent. When people idealize capitalism, they usually do so with reference to the "liberal democracies" -- the United States, the EU, Canada, Australia, New Zealand. But even the liberal democracies are not monolithic. Some have made a plausible distinction between the so-called Anglo-Saxon model and a "continental" model. The former is more liberal in the European sense, while the latter is more attentive to social issues. 
Moreoever, capitalism evolves. More precisely, individual and group rationality -- which refers to capacity to learn -- affects behavior, organisational life and policy. For instance, some now criticise the harshness of the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation -- the Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection Act of 2002 -- because of what it may entail for competing in the global economy. On the other hand, such legislation was demanded by an outraged American public, in response to the inadequate functioning of financial and energy markets, not to mention numerous conflicts of interest and abuses of power. The Great Depression, too, necessitated the introduction of strict measures in order to rescue capitalism from its own perils. Unbridled market forces can bring about havoc and misery to too many people and public policy has a role to play to avert it. 
A simple dichotomy between capitalism and communism may have made sense in 1989, but is far from meaningful now. Rather, the significant question today concerns what forms of capitalism are evolving in Central and Eastern Europe, and in other areas of the world. EU entry does not give a clearly defined answer to this question. The degree to which laws are observed and markets function in EU member states is of continuing relevance. The business world has rules of decent conduct. Without such rules business would turn into a jungle. When rent-seeking and corruption are ubiquitous, when politicians and judges can be easily bought, economy and domestic politics become rotten. This is not the type of capitalism that can make the majority of citizens happy and dignified. 
The need in the EU to cope with the pressures of globalisation and demographics is not a reason to dismiss morality and the need for mutual respect. In an enlarged Europe we need a capitalism that performs economically and socially. For this to happen, the liberty of markets has to be accompanied by the rule of law, which should punish those who are careless about and disrespectful of public interest. 
An overbloated and corrupt public sector must be combated fiercely, and there is still much to do in the new EU member countries to this end. At the same time, one should not close their eyes to wrongdoing in the private sector as well. In order to be embraced wholeheartedly by citizens, a market economy requires a moral compass. Profit seeking is the essence of a market economy, and without efficiency progress is unimaginable. But when values and a sense of direction are lost, social cohesion melts and the system breaks down. It is the responsibility of public policy to try and correct malignities that affect the functioning of markets and to deal with the social fallout of greed, lack of honesty and cynicism. A decent capitalism requires such policymaking, just as it requires the virtues found in individual beings as they strive in pursuit of happiness and material rewards. 
