11/05/2009
Interview by Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 11/05/09 Photos courtesy of dh management ag. 
Last season, Serbian tennis player Ana Ivanovic had some of the best moments so far in her professional career. She won the French Open and spent 12 weeks as No. 1 on the World Tennis Association (WTA) list. Only 21 years old, she is one of the most popular female athletes in the world. 
Near the end of the season, however, an inflammation in her right thumb forced her out of the Beijing Olympics -- a setback she described as "the most disappointing moment in my career". A string of defeats eroded her WTA ranking, and she slipped to eighth place. Now, following a coaching change, she is putting all that behind her, having already climbed a notch to No 7. 
In an interview with Southeast European Times, Ivanovic talks about her goals for this season, her relationship with fellow Serbian tennis star Jelena Jankovic, and the prospects for next year's Fed Cup. 
Southeast European Times: You were at the top of the WTA list for three months last year. What caused your decline on the list and the weaker results near the end of the season? 
Ana Ivanovic: I think I was quite unlucky to become injured just as I was getting used to being No 1. It was a very frustrating time in my career, especially having to withdraw from the Olympics, which I had dreamed about playing in for many years. 
Looking back, I probably should have taken a break from tennis and just waited until the thumb injury healed, instead of struggling and stressing about it for a couple of months. 
But now I am healthy and looking forward to getting back to my best form. It will take a lot of hard work but it's a challenge I will enjoy. 
SETimes: What have you set as your main goal this season? To return to No.1, to be among the top three female players in the world, win a Grand Slam tournament? 
Ivanovic: I have a few goals. Most importantly, I want to qualify for the Sony Ericsson Championships in Doha. I also want to win another Grand Slam. But I am focusing more on improving all areas of my game. If you improve your game then the results and rankings take care of themselves. 
SETimes: You hired a new coach, Craig Kardon, who was Martina Navratilova's coach. How is your co-operation with him, and what do you plan to work on the most in order to perfect your playing skill? 
Ivanovic: Craig and I are working very well together. We share the same ideas about my game: that I am at my best when I am attacking. He is very positive and encourages me to come to the net more, which I enjoy and believe can be a great strength for me in the future. We also want to improve my serve, so that it is more consistent. 
SETimes: Thanks to your participation, and the participation of Jelena Jankovic in the Serbian national tennis team, that team is now one of the strongest in the world. How far do you think you can go in the Fed Cup (the annual international team tennis competition for women) next year? 
Ivanovic: I think we can win it. It will be extremely tough, especially if we have some difficult away matches, but for sure Jelena and I have the ability to win this competition, and we definitely have great support too. It will be very interesting to see how it goes. 
SETimes: Certain media have reported you do not have a very good relationship with Jelena Jankovic. What is that relationship like now and what is the atmosphere like in the national team? 
 Ivanovic: No, that's not true. We get on fine. We have a very good team spirit and I have really enjoyed our Fed Cup matches this year. It's always fun to see Dejan (Vranes), who was my childhood coach and is now the captain of the team. 
SETimes: Which male and female tennis players do you think will mark this season? 
Ivanovic: There are so many good players in women's tennis at the moment. You can see the young girls coming up and even winning big titles, for example Azarenka and Wozniacki. Pavlyuchenkova did very well in Indian Wells too and she will be a dangerous player in the future. 
I actually prefer watching men's tennis because I can learn more from it, and it's fascinating to see the battle at the top of the game. I can say that I am friendly with all of the top three, especially Novak of course, and it's going to be very interesting to follow men's tennis at the Grand Slams this summer. 
SETimes: Serbian tennis has boomed thanks to you, Novak Djokovic and Jelena Jankovic. Do you think talented young players are following in your footsteps? Which young Serbian player is the one to watch? 
Ivanovic: I don't know much about the junior players, but whenever I visit Belgrade I always smile when I see kids carrying rackets around the city. It's great to see and it's clear that tennis has become very popular. I am sure there are some very talented kids and hopefully the facilities will improve for them. 
 In the Fed Cup team I have spent some time with Aleksandra Krunic. She's 15 and she's fun to hang out with. She's also going to be a very good player. 
SETimes: Do you ever think about what you will do after you stop playing tennis? 
Ivanovic: I only think about it when I am asked! I am still very young and feel like I have a lot to achieve in tennis before I can think about another career. Tennis is obviously extremely important to me, so it's difficult to think that I won't be involved in some way when I stop playing. But I also think I might enjoy trying something in the world of business. I would also like to use languages in future, because I enjoy that a lot.
