23/03/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 23/03/10
Earlier this year, the Romanian government and the Supreme Defence Council approved the creation of two national energy holdings, supervised by the ministry of economy. The joint-stock companies, Electra and Hidroenergetica, will include assets of all state-run energy companies. 
 Public debate and the result of feasibility studies led to the decision, said Economy Minister Adriean Videanu. "We needed two large companies, comparable to the regional companies in terms of size and structure of energy output," said Videanu. 
Both companies will supply and produce electricity as well as transport, distribute and supply thermal power and exploit mines and lignite quarries. In addition, Electra will produce nuclear fuel, according to the government. 
 Electra is expected to produce 28,000GW per year, while Hidroenergetica's annual output should be 24,000GW. 
"The main national interest objective is to capitalise on basic energy resources -- coal, uranium, water, gas, oil -- to ensure Romania's independent energy sources," Videanu said. He explained that the measure is aimed at boosting investment in the energy sector, while setting competition guidelines. 
Earlier this month, Videanu said that the directors of the state energy companies would only receive bonuses if performance expectations are exceeded. Criteria for performance have not been set. 
 "Once the two companies are founded, we will sell energy on the free market," said Videanu, seeking to assure the public that energy prices would not rise unexpectedly. 
 Videanu did not mention whether subsidiaries of the new holding companies -- particularly those producing thermal power -- might face possible shut downs over non-compliance with EU environmental regulations. 
 According to the daily investment paper Ziarul Financiar and the Capital Partners investment firm, Electra and Hidroenergetica have a combined employment of about 40,000 workers and an assessed market value of 4 billion euros and 3.5 billion euros respectively. 
By establishing two mammoth companies, Romania is trying to catch up to other countries in the region that have already consolidated their energy providers. Analysts expect no initial results of the reorganisation until 2012. 
According to Mediafax, Electra will include thermal power producers Turceni, Rovinari and Craiova as well as their subsidiaries: the nuclear energy company Nuclearelectrica, the hydropower firms Hidroelectrica and Hidroserv, and the lignite mining company, SNLO. 
Hidroenergetica will result from the merger between thermal companies Electrocentrale Deva and ELCEN Bucuresti, and the thermal power plant Paroseni. The new company will also include Hidroelectrica's current branches -- in the areas of Bistrita, Buzau, Cluj, Curtea de Arges, Hateg, Portile de Fier, Oradea, Sebes, Targu Jiu, Slatina -- as well as segments of a pit coal mining company known as CNH. 
