21/02/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 21/02/08
Special EU Representative in Kosovo Pieter Feith arrived in Pristina on Wednesday (February 20th) and met with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu. Feith will oversee an 1,800-strong EU mission to help Kosovo establish the administrative infrastructure it needs now that it has declared its independence. 
Following a meeting with Sejdiu, Feith said the Serb community should understand that the new EU mission, called EULEX, is not a threat. 
"The EU mission will be present in all of Kosovo, including northern Kosovo. Serbs should know that EULEX will ensure the rights for all communities," Feith said. 
He explained that EULEX is also beneficial for the Serb community. "We will not back away from north of Mitrovica," he said. "We should work much more closely with Serbs, but we are also in contact with Belgrade." 
 Feith indicated on Wednesday that he has begun his mandate. 
 "Now I am sending into Kosovo my personnel -- the personnel of the office of the special envoy -- and we are establishing the International Civil Office," said Feith. He also announced that former KFOR commander Lieutenant General Yves de Kermabon will arrive in the next few weeks to take his position as head of EULEX. 
 According to Feith, there will be a four month transition period, during which both the EU and NATO will be under operational control. "We are all working under Resolution 1244. This resolution has a solid base to establish the EU mission in Kosovo," he told reporters Wednesday, a day after EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana visited Pristina. 
"I will be here to advise the Kosovo government and am determined that [former UN envoy Martti] Ahtisaari's plan will be implemented," he said. 
Feith said that -- in co-operation with the Kosovo government -- he will convince the Serbs that Kosovo is their home and they can work and live like other communities. 
"They should understand that they are welcome to work for the future in Kosovo," he said. 
Sejdiu said Feith understands the situation in Kosovo very well, and described him as "a very experienced man in international mandates". 
