10/07/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 10/07/09
Under an unprecedented joint agreement, the Sandzak Democratic Party (SDP) and the coalition headed by the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) rejected a government plan to divide Sandzak's municipalities into two regions. The parties want a new law on regional development to define Sandzak as a single county, comprised of six municipalities. 
Since the law could not be passed without the parties' support, the government acquiesced on Tuesday (July 7th). 
"The Serbian government will meet the demands of Sandzak MPs, who want all six Sandzak municipalities to be part of one region," said Dejan Jovanovic, state secretary for regional development. 
Political clashes between the SDP and the SDA coalition have resulted in violence in the past. The parties, bitter rivals, have scarred the region with their political bickering. However, earlier this month, the two struck an agreement to co-operate. 
Sandzak, the Serbian region with the largest Bosniak population, has been strained by an economic crisis for years. The six municipalities have about 200,000 inhabitants, half of them Bosniaks. Unemployment tops 20%. 
The unexpected agreement envisions the parties joining forces to ensure economic prosperity. Both parties concede the agreement was the result of pressure by certain foreign embassies in Serbia, mostly Turkey's. Ankara has shown interest in investing in Sandzak, but only if there is political stability there. 
According to the agreement, SDA and SDP MPs will work together to fix the region's economic issues. 
Sandzak NGOs welcomed the partnership. "How were we [Bosniaks] able to agree on anything with the state of Serbia if we were unable to agree amongst ourselves," said Aida Corovic, co-ordinator of the NGO Urban In. 
However, the initiative failed to win the approval of representatives of other parties that have MPs in the region. "It is obvious that this is just an attempt by two parties to keep hold of power and their current positions in the ruling coalition. They are wholly responsible for the situation in Sandzak over the past 15 years," opposition Liberal Democrats member Kenan Hajdarevic said. 
