23/06/2011
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 23/06/11
Although Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou's new government was approved by MPs on Wednesday (June 22nd), there is still rough sailing ahead for the leaders of the embattled country. 
Wednesday's vote -- which approved the Friday government reshuffle 155-143 -- temporarily alleviated global worries that it would collapse and crash international markets in the process. 
The next challenge for the government is ratification of the Medium-Term Fiscal Strategic Programme, as the latest round of austerity measures and widespread public sector reforms is euphemistically called, and will serve as the real "litmus test" for the survival of the Papandreou government. 
The plan will be tabled in parliament early next week -- on an urgent basis -- along with the accompanying implementation law. 
At least two of the remaining 155 PASOK deputies warned that they would not vote for the mid-term programme if major state-run enterprises in their election districts are affected by measures or privatisation. 
"For me, nothing has changed, I will insist on my position," PASOK MP Alekos Athanasiadis, who is from the Kozani prefecture, told SETimes prior to the vote of confidence vote. 
The deputy opposes any privatisation or measures affecting the state-run Public Power Corp (PPC). Kozani hosts the biggest power plants and lignite pits in Greece, all managed and exploited by PPC, a listed utility viewed as among the most attractive assets for privatisation. 
Athanasiadis didn't clarify whether he would resign or vote against the mid-term plan. 
Conversely, New Democracy (ND) Party deputy Kyriakos Mitsotakis, the son of former premier Costas Mitsotakis and brother of former foreign minister Dora Bakoyannis, briefly stepped to the side of the party line on Wednesday morning. 
"If my vote was the 151st, I would vote in favour of the medium-term fiscal programme, however, we [presently] have a government majority." 
Papandreou has referred to the programme as "a clear patriotic target to manage the country's external debt; to avoid the country's sovereign default and to guarantee that Greece remains in the EU's core." 
Failure to pass the Medium-Term Fiscal Strategic Programme could realistically lead to snap elections, a prospect now welcomed by the centre-right main opposition ND, given that the latest opinion polls this week give the party a 0.9 to 1.7 point lead over ruling PASOK. Ominously, both mainstream parties fail to garner more than 50% of respondents' preferences. 
An extraordinary July 3rd meeting of the Eurogroup awaits the ratification of the plan in order to disburse the fifth tranche -- 12 billion euros -- of the 110 billion-euro bailout package, while a second bailout package looms on the horizon amid incessant bickering at the European level over details. 
 "We will not become accomplices in your gridlock; we will vote against the medium-term plan and we won't vote for the provision of the implementation law … we will continue to demand a renegotiation of the (EC-ECB-IMF) Memorandum," veteran politician and ND leader Antonis Samaras said. 
He reiterated that his party will support structural reforms, exploitation of state property, privatisations and spending cuts. 
