01/03/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 01/03/10
With no immediate answers for energy shortages, the Kosovo government is embracing new and renewable sources to meet growing demand. The government intends to reduce growing energy imports with the Kosova e Re project, a new thermal power plant to be built on the outskirts of Pristina, in Obiliq. 
"The supply will be mainly based on the exploitation of lignite and the production of electricity of thermo power plants," according to a statement by the Ministry of Energy and Mines. 
Currently, the production of electricity is a monopoly of the government-owned Kosovo Energy Company (KEK). The KEK operates the coal fired power stations Kosova A, Kosova B -- both near Pristina -- and two small hydroelectric plants. 
Production at these plants has been hampered by chronic technical problems as well as multiple lightning strikes. In 2009, KEK formed an agreement with minority communities --primarily Serbs living south of the Ibar River -- to buy power from the KEK. Given existing energy deficits, Kosovo has been forced to import electricity to fill gaps in supply. 
 The Ministry of Energy and Mines is determined to work with countries in the region to solve the problem. Almost two years ago, the agency signed a memorandum of co-operation and understanding with Albania and Bulgaria and is expected to soon do so with others. 
KEK spokesman Viktor Buzhala said Kosovo is importing electricity from commercial companies such as the Swiss EFT and Geni in Slovenia, as well as from neighbouring countries like Albania. In emergencies, Kosovo imports electricity from the Serb company Rudnap. 
Currently, mines in Trepca are the primary source of lignite in the region, with 10 billion tonnes of exploitable reserves. To date, nearly 250 million tonnes have been exploited. Though the mines are currently owned and operated by the Kosovo government, the need for foreign investment to stabilise the energy industry could lead to changes. 
"The government is dedicated to reform and development of the mine sector based on free market economy," said Blerim Rexha, Kosovo's deputy minister for energy and mines, at a ceremony on February 20th. The date marked the anniversary of a 1989 protest by Albanian miners at Trepca when Kosovo was a region of Serbia. 
Rexha said "high priority" has been given to restructuring the Trepca mines to attract a combination of public and private investment. 
In January, Kosovo organised a foreign investors' conference to attract financial interest in the Kosova e Re project. A number of potential investors participated but so far none has stepped forward with a serious plan. 
 "How many will be ready … and how many meet the preliminary criteria to make their offer for this project … will be seen by the end of February, when we expect the documents stating the investors' interest in Kosova e Re," the energy ministry reported. 
Lignite -- or "brown coal" -- the fossil fuel which now supports most of the energy generated in Kosovo, is an especially dirty source of power. Kosovo's energy ministry has said that "the closure of facilities causing the most pollution is foreseen by the end of 2017." 
The Kosova e Re plant is expected to replace the Kosova A facility. If it joined a restructured and rehabilitated Kosova B thermo power and hydro reserves, Kosovo believes it would be able to cover energy demand until 2018. 
The government also wants to seek other sources of energy. The Zhur hydro power plant near Prizren and 16 other small hydropower plants are projects in early stages. However, studies show that Kosovo has a limited potential in the field of hydro electric power. 
The generation of wind and solar energy are also part of the official programme. Solar energy is already in use in the Pristina Health Centre and at a Pristina student campus. 
