18/04/2011
By Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 18/04/11
To further its bid to join the EU, Turkey abolished capital punishment in 2002, except in wartime. Two years later, the country made the death penalty illegal in all circumstances by signing the European Convention on Human Rights. 
 Today, the likelihood of capital punishment being reinstated in Turkey seems slim, say experts. The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), expected to win in the June 12th elections, opposes capital punishment. 
"[It is] not on the government's agenda," said Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. 
"I do not expect the death penalty to be reinstated," Bogazici University professor Kemal Kirisci told SETimes. "The prime minister, surprisingly, took a similar line." 
By reinstating the death penalty, Turkey could forfeit its chances of ever joining the EU since the bloc bans capital punishment. Although Turkey has criticised the EU for dragging its feet on the accession process, the AKP officially backs Turkey's EU membership. 
 "In the last couple of years the pressure and credibility of the EU's demands have declined in Turkey," said Professor Ali Carkoglu of Koc University. "However, at the end of the day, the ultimate goal is for Turkey to gain full membership." 
According to Professor Kayhan Mutlu from Middle East Technical University, the EU should not have an effect on Turkish decision-making when it comes to changing criminal laws. "Every country has its own social, economic and political structure," he explained. "Therefore, criminal law should be independent, unless it is ignoring basic human rights and democratic principles." 
At the moment, capital punishment does not have enough support in Turkish politics to be reinstated. Carkoglu noted that all the major parties in Turkey currently oppose it. 
"Only the marginal nationalist parties want to put it on the agenda," he said. 
In 2004, Kirisci and Carkoglu conducted an opinion poll on capital punishment. "By and large, the public was against abolishing the death penalty, but the government still went ahead and lifted it to meet the Copenhagen Criteria," said Kirisci. 
 Many Turks still appear to want the government to reinstate capital punishment. In late March, the Grand Unity Party launched a campaign to support the death penalty and many Turks lined up to sign the petition. 
Other Turks, who argue against reinstatement, say the country has misused capital punishment in the past. 
The death penalty was, in many cases, used to silence political dissent. The last man to be executed in Turkey was 28-year old Hidir Aslan, a member of the illegal leftist organisation Devrimci Yol. He was convicted of high treason and hanged in 1984. 
