11/12/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 11/12/12
The small- and medium-size business sector in the region that is essential for economic development is facing major financial obstacles including lack of investments, debt collection difficulties, indebtedness and poor access to bank funds. 
"Small- and medium-sized businesses are not well represented on the national level, and need other steps; business associations also need to strengthen their profile and negotiating position. The government should lead in gathering stakeholders to solve market constraints," Anthony Sinclair, USAID economic advisor in Serbia, told SETimes. 
"Banks have to change the way they think about private businesses, and businesses in turn must understand how banks work and take steps to lower their risks," he added. 
The 2012-2013 World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness report ranked several regional countries for loan access: Albania ranks 143rd, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) 123rd, Serbia 105th, Croatia 95th, Romania 75th, Macedonia 70th, and Bulgaria 40th. 
The report assesses a competitiveness landscape of 144 economies, providing insight into the drivers of their productivity and prosperity. 
USAID Business Enabling Project data shows that, in Serbia, 60 percent of small- and medium-sized businesses do not borrow from common loan sources including banks, leasing and microcredits. About 50 percent of loans come from banks, but family and friends are the primary source of financing for 25 percent of businesses. 
USAID Serbia, in co-operation with experts from several NGOs, educational institutions, banks and enterprise representatives, made 10 recommendations to improve financial business access. 
The suggestions included obtaining credit contracts, liberalising financial regulations for small- and medium-sized business lending, supporting development of non-bank credit institutions, adopting measures for loan issuance and expanding the use of credit reporting. 
Dragijana Radonjic Petrovic, adviser at the ministry of finance and economy, said some of the obstacles have been removed. 
"There aren't enough financial means important for innovative private businesses, such as venture capital funds and business providers in Serbia. But the work of the innovation fund, which finances innovative start-up companies and activities of the first Serbian Business Angels Network, is encouraging," Petrovic told SETimes. 
The Serbian Business Angels Network's main goal is to connect business "angels" -- individuals ready to invest in new business ideas and projects -- to entrepreneurs with a developed business plan and a team of people ready to implement the idea and to develop the business project. Serbia received its first business angel investors this year. 
Croatia and Bulgaria have a longer tradition of non-bank private business financing. 
Croatia's first official organisation of business angels, Crane, was formed a few years ago. 
"We actively promote entrepreneurship in Croatia and the region, but all the countries have the same problem: investment culture is low, and there aren't enough investors. A far better angel investment must be promoted, since it's one of the best ways to help creative people and projects," Sasa Cvetojevic, entrepreneur and angel investor from Croatia, told SETimes. 
