27/08/2007
(Reuters, Hina, Javno, Xinhua, Makfax - 26/08/07; Hina - 22/08/07)
Croatia and Slovenia will refer their long-standing border disagreements to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague, the prime ministers of the two countries said Sunday (August 26th). "
We have reached a consensus in principle to present for arbitration our disputes over the land as well as sea borders at the court," Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Jansa said following talks with his Croatian counterpart, Ivo Sanader. 
Croatia and Slovenia have been unable to agree on a number of territorial issues since they declared their independence from the former Yugoslavia in 1991. As a result, numerous border incidents have occurred in the past years, including at Piran Bay in the northern Adriatic Sea and in the area of the Mura River. 
Slovenia, whose Adriatic coastline is less than 50km long, is seeking a solution that would allow it to have direct access to international waters, without having to pass through Italian or Croatian territorial waters. 
The two countries signed an accord on the access to international waters in 2001, but it ran into opposition from the Croatian public and was never ratified by parliament. 
In 2003, Croatia announced plans to proclaim an exclusive economic zone in the Adriatic, saying this would improve control over fishing and pollution. The measure, which would have left Slovenia without direct access to international shipping waters, prompted strong protests from Ljubljana, which threatened to withdraw its support for the neighbouring country's EU bid. Croatia eventually put the idea on hold. 
In 2005, however, the Slovenian government endorsed a bill establishing an ecological zone and an epicontinental shelf in the contested Piran Bay. Croatia reacted angrily, accusing its western neighbour of harbouring "territorial aspirations". 
After years of failed efforts to resolve the border dispute bilaterally, Slovenia said earlier this month that it was ready to have it referred to the ICJ, but on three conditions. The Hague court's ruling, it said, must cover the entire sea and land border. In addition, the decision must rest on "historical circumstances" and "principles of justice"; and must reflect the situation prior to the two countries' secession. 
During their meeting on the Slovenian island of Bled on Sunday, Jansa and Sanader agreed that the ICJ's ruling on the border disagreements between their countries will be binding. According to a statement issued after the meeting, two intergovernmental commissions will prepare a framework for arbitration, which will have to be confirmed by the parliaments of the two countries, before being forwarded to the ICJ. 
The two leaders also agreed that the other open issues between Croatia and Slovenia, including the jointly-owned Krsko nuclear power plant and the outstanding debts of the now defunct Ljubljanska Banka to Croatian depositors, will be settled through bilateral dialogue. 
 Sanader said that the two sides have also agreed to address each issue separately instead of treating them as a package. This is expected to speed up the process. 
"We will continue to try and solve all the other unsolved issues ourselves," Jansa said. "We think we should have some results by the end of this year." 
