22/12/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times -- 22/12/05
Since accession talks with the EU began in October, Turkey has experienced ups and downs in its relationship with Brussels. While the European Commission's (EC) first annual report on the country contained positive assessments of economic progress, it also expressed concern over human rights issues, the influence of the military, and the ongoing Cyprus problem. 
Subsequently, the EU has been at odds with Ankara over a legal proceeding brought against a renowned writer for allegedly "insulting" Turkey. 
With the release of the progress report, Turkey achieved recognition from the EC as a functioning market economy and praise for its reform programme. All in all, however, the EC concluded that the pace of change slowed during 2005, and that while the legislation over the years has been significant, implementation has lagged. 
Despite a restructuring of the National Security Council to reduce the overt influence of the military on civilian affairs, the armed forces in Turkey "continue to exercise influence through informal mechanisms," the EC noted. 
The importance of resolving the decades-long Cyprus dispute was highlighted in the report, which lauded Turkey for continuing to support efforts to reach a solution within the UN framework and in line with EU principles. However, the EC also set a two-year deadline for Turkey to recognise Cyprus and extend a customs union deal with the EU to the Greek Cypriots. The Greek Cypriot state, which Turkey does not recognise, joined the EU in May 2004, while the Turkish-sponsored breakaway state in the north was excluded. 
As for freedom of religion, the report found that "only very limited progress has been made in establishing legislation which addresses outstanding problems." 
"Non-Muslim religious communities continue to experience difficulties connected with legal personality, property rights, training of clergy, residence rights and work permits for Turkish and non-Turkish clergy, schools and internal management," it said. 
The Commission took note of amendments to the Penal Code aimed at fostering greater freedom of expression, but warned that the impact was limited. "In terms of implementation, several problems remain. Although a number of people prosecuted for expressing non-violent opinion have been acquitted by higher judicial bodies, in a number of cases journalists, editors, writers and other citizens continue to be prosecuted and in some cases convicted," it said. 
As though to further highlight the issue, an international controversy has since developed over charges brought against writer Orhan Pamuk for comments he made to a Swiss newspaper about two highly sensitive issues in Turkey -- the massacres of Armenians during the waning days of the Ottoman Empire, and mass casualties among Kurds as a result of the separatist conflict with Turkish security forces. 
The trial "casts a shadow" over Turkey's EU negotiations and presents an "opportunity to set a positive precedent for the numerous other cases of free speech that are awaiting trial," according to EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. 
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has rebuffed the criticism from Brussels, however, charging that it amounts to inappropriate pressure on the domestic judiciary. 
The EC's comments regarding Cyprus have also met with a cool response in Ankara. Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul calling then "unreasonable" and warning that Turkish-EU co-operation on strategic issues could be hampered if Brussels continues to press such demands. 
