15/03/2005
(Institute for War and Peace Reporting, BBC - 11/03/05; AFP, The Centre for SouthEast European Studies - 10/03/05; Blic - 09/03/05)
Former Kosovo Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj's decision to turn himself in to the UN war crimes tribunal has been praised not only by international officials, but also by politicians and journalists in some of the former Yugoslav republics. 
Haradinaj's move is a "responsible act", Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic said. Journalists in Croatia, meanwhile, contrasted the example set by Haradinaj with that of fugitive general Ante Gotovina, whose refusal to surrender to the UN tribunal could derail the launch of EU accession talks, scheduled to begin on Thursday (17 March). One of the ICTY's three most-wanted indictees, Gotovina has been on the run since mid-2001. His extradition to The Hague is the last remaining condition Zagreb must meet for EU accession talks to proceed. 
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) has indicted Haradinaj with 37 counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war, charging him with involvement in persecution, murder, rape and other atrocities committed during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo. He has denied the allegations. 
"Haradinaj knew something that others refuse to understand," the Croatian daily Jutarnji List said on 10 March. "He knew that if he refused to appear [before the ICTY], Kosovo risked falling into isolation and poverty." 
"Unlike the eternal fugitive Gotovina ... Haradinaj will return to Kosovo…not with the image of a criminal," predicted another Croatian daily, the independent Novi List. 
Serbia-Montenegro Human Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic said the indictment of Haradinaj would do much to boost Serbian confidence in the ICTY. Moreover, he added, it would put authorities under greater pressure to co-operate fully with the court. 
The Kosovo Albanians have taught Croats and Serbs a lesson on how to meet their obligations to the international community, the Slovene daily Delo wrote in a comment on Haradinaj's decision. 
The paper criticised Croatia for "staggering more or less unnecessarily" on its EU accession path and Serbia for sending to The Hague only those indictees who were ready to surrender. 
If it wanted, Serbia could catch all ICTY indictees, the paper said, adding that Haradinaj's surrender -- which Serbian authorities have long called for -- has eliminated one of the main arguments which Belgrade has used to justify its slow pace of co-operation. 
Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska welcomed the generally calm reaction of Kosovo Albanians to Haradinaj's indictment and surrender. It sends "an extremely important signal" about the province's readiness to adopt European values and would help them "score significant points for talks on Kosovo's future status", she said. 
