01/04/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 01/04/09 
Representatives of the Kosovo Donors Conference -- first held in Brussels in 2008 -- and the Kosovo government met at a high-level forum Tuesday (March 31st) in Pristina to discuss Kosovo's macroeconomic and fiscal management policies. 
The forum serves as a mechanism to review annual progress in economic and social development and the effectiveness of international assistance to Kosovo. This year, the focus was on the fields of energy, trade and industry, transport and telecommunications and education. 
Last year's donors conference drew representatives of 37 countries and 16 international organisations. Participants pledged 1.2 billion euros; the EU alone pledged 508m euros. 
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci pledged full accountability for using the donors' funds. "We guarantee the donors accountability for every spent cent. As never before, the future of Kosovo is safe within the European framework," Thaci said. 
European Commission Unit for Kosovo head Lawrence Meredith expressed the donors' expectation for "Kosovo to co-ordinate the donors' financing for the maximum benefit of all Kosovo citizens". 
Thaci said the requirements of Kosovo "surpass its capacities to finance all needs". Kosovo's economy will grow more slowly in coming years because of the global recession, he said, adding the country is determined to continue reforms nonetheless. 
Kosovo has the lowest GDP and highest unemployment rate in Europe. Even ensuring drinking water is becoming difficult as there is no sewage treatment available. 
"Inadequate health care has resulted in an increase of child mortality -- three times higher than the European average -- while UNICEF reports that 10% of Kosovo children under the age of five suffer from chronic malnutrition," said Thaci. 
Although about 38m euros will fund improvements in education this year, the government "still cannot guarantee that Kosovo students have the necessary means to compete in the global economy", he said. However, Kosovo authorities are working towards IMF and World Bank membership. 
Membership in these organisations "will integrate Kosovo into the world economic system and will ... stimulate growth in our economy", said Thaci. "That will improve living conditions for all Kosovo citizens." 
The next meeting of the high-level forum is expected in February 2010. 
