13/10/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 13/10/10
Former Croatian prime minister Ivo Sanader faced questions Tuesday (October 12th) from a second parliamentary inquiry commission investigating the privatisation of INA, Croatia's biggest oil and gas company. 
Parliament members want to know more about the 2009 purchase of 22 INA stakes, which gave Hungary's MOL a majority vote in INA. 
"The contract with MOL was a success and when the government shares fell under 50% it was logical that MOL acquired more rights," Sanader said. 
He insisted that party leaders and his cabinet, including current Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor, participated in the decision-making and knew what was going on. 
With more than a dozen allies and partners of Sanader under arrest or investigation, speculation has been rife concerning his role in an apparent epidemic of corruption. 
 If Sanader has been feeling the pressure, it was not apparent during his testimony. He answered questions for hours, firmly rejecting any wrongdoing. He was calm, self-confident and prepared. 
He stressed that he is no longer involved in politics. "This enables me to see thing more clearly, more objectively," he said. 
When asked about who knew what, he used a well-known Croatian proverb to describe former colleagues who have become his accusers. 
"The one who digs someone else's grave will find himself in it," he remarked. 
Sanader said that the INA privatisation started under a previous, SDP- led government and that his own aides and ministers knew exactly what was going on. That statement caused a stir, since the current government is led by Sanader's one-time close aide, Kosor. She claims no involvement in the case. 
"I hope people will find out the truth. We need to know who made the wrong decisions and where is our money," Tomislav Kralj, a student joining the crowds gathered outside parliament, told SETimes. 
Sanader came without a defence lawyer, testifying as a witness. The parliamentary commission questioning Sanader cannot press charges, but may seek a formal probe. 
