30/04/2009
(EurActiv - 29/04/09; AFP, Reuters, DPA, FT, BBC, Euronews, Xinhua - 28/04/09; Euobserver - 27/04/09)
Albania applied for EU membership Tuesday (April 28th) in Prague, less than a month after it joined NATO in tandem with Croatia. 
"This act has historic significance, marking the return of my nation to the family of European nations," Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha said before handing over the application to Czech counterpart Mirek Topolanek, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency. 
Albania made its first step towards EU membership in June 2006, when it signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the Union. 
The European Commission's (EC) latest regular report on Albania's progress, issued in November 2008, said the country still had to fight organised crime and corruption, make more "progress in judicial reform" and strengthen its public administration. 
 Brussels had called on Albania to delay its application until after its June 28th general elections, but the country submitted the application anyway. Welcoming the application at a ceremony Tuesday in Prague, Topolanek said Albania had undergone "tremendous positive changes". 
"I am convinced that they are halfway through [to full membership] today," he said, according to AFP. 
The Czech prime minister noted there is still "a huge amount of work" Albania must do before it is able to join the Union, which is unlikely to happen before 2015 at the earliest, according to a BBC report Tuesday. 
Michael Leigh, the EC's director-general for enlargement, who also attended the ceremony in Prague, commended Albania for progress in enacting key EU-required reforms and for its "constructive and stabilising role" in the Balkans. 
"Holding parliamentary elections in June in a free and fair manner remains a key condition," he warned. 
Irregularities and allegations of vote-rigging have marred elections there since communism fell in December 1990. 
Last November, parliament introduced a proportional electoral system, which, according to Berisha's ruling Democratic Party, would clarify election results. 
Albania became on Tuesday the second Western Balkan country to apply for membership since December, following Montenegro. 
Tirana might also have to wait several months for a green light from Brussels, the British daily <i>Financial Times</i> editorialised on Tuesday, noting that it would be "wrong" for the EU to "overlook" Albania's bid. 
"The Union's eastward enlargement is among its greatest successes; it must be enhanced by embracing the fragile states of the Western Balkans, including Albania," the paper said. 
Croatia is most advanced in the accession process and could join the EU within the next two years. Following it are Macedonia, Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo. 
