15/09/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/09/10
With the economic crisis making it more of a challenge to find employment, keeping one's current job has become a common preoccupation. With employers in a situation of power, some say workplace abuse -- including bullying and mobbing -- has become more common. 
Assistant Labour and Social Policy Minister Radmila Bukumiric-Katic told SETimes there are no official statistics in Serbia on the frequency of mobbing, a term used to describe collective abuse carried out against an individual by a group or groups of co-workers. That can mean anything from verbal harassment and threats to the spreading of rumours. 
"Under the law, the aim is to provide more precise stats on the frequency of mobbing. According to data we have, most frequent victims of mobbing are women, employees early on in their career and those just a step away from retirement," she said. 
One problem is that mobbing can be hard to define, and even harder to prove. For that reason, the new law specifically outlines "six types of behaviour that qualify as abuse in the workplace," Bukumiric-Katic said. 
 These are: inability to communicate with the employer, instigation of poor co-worker relations, sexual harassment, insults aimed at personal identity and reputation, endangerment of work reputation, and damage to one's health. 
Serbia is only the ninth country in Europe to pass an anti-mobbing law, although in some European countries the issue is regulated under other statutes. 
 "The objective of the law is to resolve all disputes between employers and employees without the court process. So far, workplace abuse court cases have been rare, since employees are afraid to report mobbing," Bukumiric-Katic said. 
 If a court case is launched, she added, the employer may receive a fine of 100 euros to 8,000 euros, depending on the severity. 
It is important to understand what does and doesn't constitute mobbing, Bukumiric-Katic said. 
 "Employees often complain about salaries and deductions, considering such issues a form of mobbing, which they are not. Rather, they are defined by the Labour Law," she explained. 
 Members of the public think it is good to have an anti-mobbing law enforced, but doubt it will prevent employers from behaving badly. 
"I think the law will remain only in writing, as employees doubt that the state and judiciary will protect them from abusive employers. No one will dare report mobbing, since that will either leave them jobless or put them through hell if they stay with the company," Miona Filipovic, 47, said. 
Dragica Zivanovic, 32, thinks employers will be slightly more cautious in the early days after the law's implementation. "Employers will take greater care at first, until, as with most other regulations in Serbia, it turns out that the anti-mobbing law cannot be effectively enforced," Zivanovic said. 
