01/12/2004
By Vahit Bora for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 01/12/04
Turkey is preparing to reform its tight policy on transboundary rivers and water resources in order to comply with EU criteria and international law. The country's foreign ministry has established two working groups -- one to prepare the new water legislation, taking into account Turkey's needs as well as the EU Water Framework Directive, and the other to carry out the necessary restructuring of institutions. 
As an EU candidate, Turkey is required to harmonise its laws, including those governing environmental resources, with those of the Union. Ankara is hoping to start membership negotiations with the EU in 2005, provided the Union gives the go-ahead during its summit this month. The EU-Turkey Accession Partnership Agreement of 2003 urged Turkey to approve the Union's water standards. 
At the same time, the country must balance its need to safeguard its resources with current interpretations of international law, which require countries to consider the impact of water policies on neighbouring countries. Transboundary rivers constitute 40 per cent of Turkey's water potential. It has been reported that the Middle East, and the Gulf States in particular, will face serious water shortages during the next 25 years, and Turkey is likely to be one of the main sources for the transfer of fresh water. 
The two important rivers originating in Turkey -- the Tigris and the Euphrates -- have long been the subject of disagreements with water-stressed Syria and Iraq, which are traversed by both rivers. During the 1990s, while Syria and Iraq were calling on Turkey to release more water for agricultural use, the country instead decided to construct dams to foster economic growth in its poorest regions. Under a protocol signed in 1987, Turkey releases 500 cubic metres per second of water to Syria, which would like to see this amount increased to 700 cubic metres. Once Ankara signs the recent international conventions on transboundary rivers, it will have to obtain Syria's approval if it wants to build a dam on the Euphrates. 
Turkey also has its own long-term needs to consider. Many experts warn the country could face shortages by 2030, due to a growing population, combined with rapid urbanisation and industrialisation. Even as the foreign ministry sets about developing a more flexible policy, it is also seeking precautions. Ankara will likely push Syria and Iraq to acknowledge the Tigris and the Euphrates as having one river basin, thus decreasing the requirements under international law. In addition, Turkey will try to prevent interventions by third parties, demanding instead that only riparian states should be involved in discussions concerning water rights. 
