04/09/2006
(Hurriyet, The New York Times, Turkish Press - 04/09/06; AP, International Herald Tribune, VOA, Reuters, The Jerusalem Post, Euronews, Turkish Daily News, Zaman - 03/09/06; VOA - 02/09/06; Journal of Turkish Weekly - 01/09/06)
As the expanded UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) begins to take shape, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan urged Muslim nations Sunday (3 September) to join the operation. 
"We cannot forget that a historic duty has fallen on us," AP quoted the Turkish leader as saying in an address at the inauguration of the 56-nation Organisation of the Islamic Conference's Youth Forum in Istanbul. "We cannot put aside the need to protect the existing peace. If 22 European countries are joining, at least as many Muslim countries need to join also." 
The Turkish government submitted a resolution to parliament on Friday, asking it to approve the deployment of peacekeeping troops to Lebanon. Lawmakers are due to hold an extraordinary session on Tuesday -- and expectations are that, despite public opposition to Turkey's participation in UNIFIL, the motion will get the necessary support. The ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has an overwhelming majority in the 550-seat assembly. 
"It would be treason to our history, our future and the high interests of our people to stay away," Erdogan said in a televised address Thursday evening, defending the AKP's decision. "The only way to protect our interests is to be part of the process nearby instead of remaining as spectators. Turkey will not be a spectator to the developments in the region as it was not to the tragedies that occurred in Bosnia and Kosovo." 
The resolution envisions that Turkish troops be sent to Lebanon for up to a one-year term to support other national UNIFIL contingents in naval and air transportation operations and to provide assistance in humanitarian activities. Their tasks would also include preventing arms smuggling and providing training for the Lebanese Army. 
Officials in Ankara repeatedly have made it clear that Turkish troops will not take part in any operation to disarm the Hezbollah militants. If they are asked to do so, Erdogan told reporters on Saturday, "the Turkish government will withdraw all forces there". 
While the resolution submitted to parliament reportedly does not specify the number of troops the country would contribute to UNIFIL, earlier reports indicated Ankara was considering sending up to 1,200 non-combat soldiers. 
UN Security Council Resolution 1701, adopted three days before the ceasefire between Israel and Hezbollah became effective on 14 August, authorised UNIFIL's expansion to up to a 15,000-strong force. During a meeting of EU foreign ministers in Brussels about ten days ago, member nations pledged to contribute nearly 7,000 troops to bolster the force. 
