16/03/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 16/03/09
At a meeting Friday (March 13th) in Sarajevo, the ambassadors of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) formally appointed Austrian Ambassador to Slovenia Valentin Inzko the next top international mediator in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
The Office of the High Representative (OHR) will now inform the UN Security Council of the PIC Steering Board's decision, which the council is expected to approve. Inzko will take up his new duties immediately following the PIC Steering Board Political Directors' meeting on March 26th. Inzko succeeds Miroslav Lajcak, who became the Slovak foreign minister in late January. 
The high representative position was established after the 1991-1995 conflict in BiH to help stabilise the country. In order to help BiH accomplish preconditions for membership into the EU, the position doubles as the Union's special representative (EUSR) for BiH. The EU appointed Inzko as the new EUSR on March 11th. He will serve in the position until February 2010. 
EU security chief Javier Solana welcomed the appointment and pledged his full support to Inzko. 
"Valentin Inzko is a senior diplomat with an in-depth knowledge of the Western Balkans and of BiH in particular," Solana stressed. 
Inzko will also provide political guidance to the EU police mission (EUPM) and the EU military forces in the country (EUFOR), help direct the BiH authorities regarding full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and provide advice and facilitation in the process of constitutional reform. 
Some say Inzko is taking on a difficult task, since leading Bosnian Serb officials want to see the OHR shut down as soon as possible, while Bosniak politicians in Sarajevo -- who fear its disappearance would endanger BiH statehood -- urge a continuation of its mandate. 
At a recent press conference, Inzko said he would not hesitate to use so-called Bonn powers, which allow him to dismiss local officials who act against the Dayton Peace Agreement. 
Inzko was born in 1949 and has a distinguished diplomatic career. He served as Austrian ambassador to Slovenia until being appointed the EUSR. Before that, Inzko served as his country's press and culture attache in Belgrade from 1982 to 1986 and then represented Austria at the UN. In 1992 he headed the OSCE mission in Sandzak, Novi Pazar (Serbia). After the BiH conflict, he became the first Austrian ambassador to Sarajevo. 
