11/09/2007
(AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, Beta, B92, Balkan Investigative Reporting Network, Serbian Government - 10/09/07)
EU and Serbian officials welcomed on Monday (September 10th) the conclusion of talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), considered a key step on the road to EU membership. The deal would pave the way for closer bilateral trade and economic ties. 
 "I am happy to announce we have reached a technical deal on the content and text of the agreement," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn told reporters in Brussels. 
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic, who headed Belgrade's delegation in the final round of the talks, voiced hope that the pact will be sealed by the end of this year and that his country will then be recognised as an official EU candidate in 2008. 
Rehn made it clear, however, that the 27-nation bloc will only sign the SAA once Serbia has demonstrated full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
The Hague-based court is still pushing for the handover of four war crimes fugitives from the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s, including wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic. Both face charges of genocide over their alleged roles in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo. 
Rehn indicated on Monday that the EU will decide whether to proceed towards the finalisation of the SAA on the basis of chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte's upcoming report on Serbia's co-operation with the ICTY. The prosecutor, who is due to leave her post in December, is expected to pay a final visit to Belgrade later this month. 
In May 2006, the EU suspended SAA talks with Belgrade over its lack of co-operation with the UN tribunal. The two sides returned to the negotiating table on June 13th, less than two weeks after former Bosnian Serb General Zdravko Tolimir -- a close Mladic aide, also indicted on charges of genocide -- was arrested and transferred to The Hague. 
 Rasim Ljajic, the head of Serbia's council for co-operation with the ICTY, said on Monday his country was making every effort to arrest the four remaining fugitives. 
"If these efforts do not produce any results, I do not see any other solution but to change our tactics and strategies, or change the people that are responsible for implementing the plan," Belgrade-based B92 quoted him as saying. 
Speaking in Brussels later, Djelic voiced confidence that del Ponte would confirm Belgrade's commitment to meeting its obligations. 
Once the SAA has been finalised, Serbia will obtain easier access to EU markets and receive financial support from the Union to underpin the country's political and economic reform efforts. Serbian citizens, according to Rehn, will also benefit from an easing of EU visa restrictions. 
The commissioner also said on Monday that Djelic assured him Serbia is not planning to send troops to Kosovo to prevent it from being recognised as an independent state. An official from Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's party suggested last week that troops were an option. 
 "I have received clarification and I have been reassured that there has been a misunderstanding and Serbia is by no means contemplating any use of force or military action," Rehn told reporters. 
Meanwhile, Italy urged the EU on Monday to give Serbia "great political and economic attention" and put it on "a fast track to membership" of the Union, in a bid to help resolve the deadlock in the process of determining Kosovo's final status. 
 "Serbia is now undergoing a very tough historical moment due to the Kosovo problem," Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi said at a joint news conference with Slovenian counterpart Janez Jansa. "We have to prove Serbia is not alone; we are dealing here with the whole European Union's nature and concept." 
Jansa, whose country will take over the rotating EU presidency from Portugal on January 1st, suggested that Slovenia would support any proposal aimed at providing incentives to Serbia on its EU accession path. But such initiatives should not be "linked to the solution of the Kosovo status problem", he said. 
