29/04/2009
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Split -- 29/04/09
Croatia's second largest city, Split, has roots dating to antiquity, but its active contemporary scene includes a vibrant artistic side, complete with numerous museums and galleries, a well-known summer music festival and concerts, a famed national theatre, excellent restaurants and a lively waterfront, the Riva. 
In March, Mayor Ivan Kuret announced that the 1,700-year-old Adriatic port would join the contest to become one of two European Capitals of Culture in 2020 and began gathering a number of experts to formulate a strategy. 
The European Capital of Culture is a city chosen by the EU to showcase its cultural life and development for one year. Cities tapped for the honour use the year to transform their cultural base and raise their profile. Liverpool was the European Capital of Culture in 2008; Linz and Vilnius succeeded it this year. Split must complete an official application for the title by 2014. 
"I've taken part in the meeting as I believe the entire process … could now bring to Split something that the Mediterranean Games brought in 1979," said Croatian musician Dragan Lukic. 
Those Games brought to Split not only the Poljud football stadium -- an architectural marvel of that era -- and additional athletic facilities, but also improved other urban amenities for the city's more than 250,000 residents. Thirty years later, though, the bloom has faded somewhat and Split could use another upgrade. Deficiencies in infrastructure, such as a lack of modern hotels, are a chief barrier to achieving the 2020 goal. 
To strengthen Split's contemporary appeal, Lukic has suggested the "launching [of] a cabaret with the music of the late Split-born composer Ivo Tijardovic. There is no doubt that would be a huge attraction for the tens of thousands of tourists who visit Split every year," he said. Other residents have proposed their own ideas for the city's 2020 bid. 
Members of Split's application committee, organised after Kuret's meeting with local leaders, intend to learn from representatives of previously selected cities how to prevail in the process. 
 "I'm confident that the city of Split with its cultural tradition and its potential could become the European Capital of Culture," said Kuret. 
Among numerous cultural treasures, mediaeval churches and archaeological sites, Split boasts the 1,700-year-old Diocletian's Palace. The Roman emperor Diocletian is generally credited with founding the city. Many of Split's cultural landmarks stand within the palace walls. 
