18/07/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 18/07/06
Meeting with EU officials on Monday (17 July), Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica presented an Action Plan for achieving full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. Initial reaction from Brussels has been positive, though EU leaders also say they await concrete results. 
Serbia has been trying to persuade the bloc to restart Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) talks, suspended in early May due to Belgrade's failure to hand over Ratko Mladic, one of The Hague-based tribunal's top indictees. 
"I believe that this document will facilitate more efficient co-operation with The Hague tribunal and the EU and finally its completion. Serbia has already demonstrated the political will for such co-operation by extraditing 16 indictees to the tribunal in less than a year. This proves that Serbia wants to co-operate and that is without any doubt. The outstanding cases, including that of Ratko Mladic, must not change that," Kostunica said. 
The six-point Action Plan sets the location, arrest and extradition of Mladic and other at-large indictees as its principal aim. It calls for appointing a special co-ordinator, who will directly co-operate with the UN tribunal. It also envisions a media campaign, co-operation between security services, and amendments to certain laws. 
Finnish Foreign Minister Erkki Tuomioja, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, said the plan "clearly demonstrates Serbia's decisiveness to achieve full co-operation with the tribunal, including the arrest and extradition of Ratko Mladic".
However, he added, the plan must be developed further and its implementation should start immediately. Similar comments came from Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, who said tangible results are more important than any blueprint. 
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said he is very happy with the Action Plan. "I am sure this will be not only a good, but also a very successful document," he said. 
Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot, however, was more sceptical. "We will see, they have said it so often. I have been there on various occasions and each time they say in a week or in 14 days they will catch Mladic … I'm still waiting," he said. 
There has been no word yet from Brussels concerning the SAA talks. However, a recent Reuters report quoted an unnamed British diplomat as saying the negotiations could resume in September if Brussels is satisfied with the plan. 
"If the plan is convincing, there is then a great readiness to restart the talks," the diplomat reportedly said. However, this depends on how the UN tribunal assesses the document, he cautioned. 
