22/08/2006
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 22/08/06
Prominent figures on the Romanian political scene have been falling one by one as the National Council for Research on the Communist Secret Service Archive (CNSAS) started declassifying files of the once-feared Securitate. One high-profile victim of these long-awaited disclosures is Mona Musca, formerly vice-president of the National Liberal Party (PNL) and currently a member of parliament. 
Earlier this month, Musca acknowledged that in 1977, while a university professor in Timisoara, she agreed to provide Securitate with information on foreign students. Although she denies actual involvement in political police activities, her dossier reveals that she gave the secret police 15 notes containing such information. 
Musca's case is especially important because she has established herself as one of the most vehement opponents of former communist collaboraters involved in politics. Moreover, recent polls -- taken before the latest revelations -- had ranked her second after President Traian Basescu in terms of trustworthiness. The PNL has now withdrawn its backing from Musca and is considering whether to expel her. 
With accusations and denials flying, a kind of hysteria has taken hold of the political landscape. Even the president has been affected. One of his predecessors in the office -- Emil Constantinescu -- has suggested Basescu had a secret police dossier. The CNSAS has since denied it. 
The Romanian press, meanwhile, published a list of 29 politicians suspected of Securitate collaboration. Two MPs, conservative Radu Terinte and Sogor Csaba of the Magyar Democratic Union of Romania, have acknowledged giving informative notes or declarations to Securitate. The rest on the list claim they were only being monitored by the communist secret police, and were not collaborators. But that's for the CNSAS to decide. 
Politicians are not the only ones affected. Not long ago, Carol Sebastian, deputy editor-in-chief of the daily Cotidianul, tendered his resignation after it was disclosed that Securitate recruited him during his student days in the 1980s. His mission was to supervise his friend, the poet Andrei Bodiu. 
The Civic Media Association has handed over to CNSAS a list of 200 journalists thought to have been Securitate informers. Most are well known and respected. The verification process is expected to last around three months. The results may be even more momentous than in the case of politicians, since journalists are seen as opinion-formers. 
Historians estimate there were nearly a million Securitate informers in 1989. In the 16 years since the fall of communism, Romania has made marginal progress in cleaning up the remnants of that era. The issue has, for the most part, been a taboo among legislators. Despite the current political "tsunami", the process may still be a long and laborious one. 
