04/12/2006
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 04/12/06
The Croatian government is preparing a new strategy to promote the benefits of NATO membership. The officials in Zagreb have decided to launch this campaign because polls show support for joining NATO has been falling dramatically in past months. According to recent surveys, only 29% of Croatians back joining the Alliance. 
The government has a lot to worry about because just as public support wanes, the process of entering NATO is speeding up. The recent Riga summit showed that Croatia -- along with Albania and Macedonia -- could expect a NATO invitation in just two years' time. 
Communications and public relation experts tasked with developing the new strategy have decided to call on public figures, celebrities and Croatian music and movie stars to join the effort and promote the advantages of NATO membership. Prominent Croatians will speak publicly about this issue, make promotional videos and TV commercials to demonstrate membership benefits. This strategy is being discussed and is to be finalised at the beginning of next year. 
However, analysts warn that the public is very sensitive regarding NATO and much needs to be done to change the general climate of opinion. While support for EU accession remains stable, at around 55%, backing for NATO membership has declined because of concerns over Iraq. The Croatian public strongly opposes the possibility of sending Croatian troops to Iraq and does not support building military bases on the Adriatic coast. 
Also of interest is the question of who would make a final decision on membership. Would it come about through an act of parliament, or via a binding referendum? Parliament would easily approve joining NATO, which the government views as a strategic goal. By contrast, if a referendum were held today, voters would reject the idea. Interestingly, not one of the parliamentary parties opposes NATO membership. 
The government openly welcomed NATO's recent announcement that Croatia can soon expect an invitation. The government adopted a special statement applauding the NATO Declaration regarding the Alliance's new tasks -- which include being ready for enlargement in 2008. Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said the government was pleased that NATO had recognised Croatia' efforts. 
"NATO is no longer what it used to be during the Cold War. It shares the common values of freedom and peace. Had Croatia been a member of NATO, no one would have dared to drop even one bomb in 1991," said Sanader at the government session. 
He stressed that with NATO membership, Croatia aims to share the global values of freedom and peace, human and minority rights, democracy and the rule of law. The new communication strategy will focus on promoting these values. 
