23/02/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --23/02/09
Serbia has been seeing a notable increase in foster families. According to the labour and social policy ministry, the number has gone up 130% since 2004. 
Currently, around 3,500 foster families are caring for about 4,000 children, with the largest concentration in Belgrade. Around 30% of these children have physical or mental disabilities. 
One reason for the trend is the desire of many families to adopt. In Serbia, adoption requires a lengthy procedure and extensive paperwork. On average, for every child needing adoption, four or five couples are waiting. Many couples who cannot have children turn to foster parenting instead. Thanks to this trend, the number of children growing up in institutions is decreasing and currently stands at about 900. 
 "The goal is to have the fewest children possible growing up in institutions," says Labour and Social Policy Minister Rasim Ljajic. "Only in a family environment can children develop properly and reach the maximum of their capabilities." 
To ensure adequate expert support, as well as to monitor the development of children in foster families, Ljajic's ministry recently established the Centre for the Family Placement of Children and Youth. 
Centre experts visit foster families at least once a month. When possible, they arrange meetings between foster children and their biological parents. Ljajic has also announced the launch of 16 regional centres that will provide similar services across the country. 
The ministry is also collaborating with the European Commission and the NGO Save the Children on a three-year, 960,000-euro programme aimed at promoting specialised foster care for disabled children. It will launch in April. 
According to Save the Children regional director for South-East Europe Dragan Strinic, foster parenting in Serbia is at a higher level than in neighbouring countries. However, he cautions, children with various types of disability still do not receive adequate support. 
"There is still prejudice among the public and scepticism among the professionals, as well as a lack of knowledge and skills in this area," Strinic says. 
Meanwhile, foster families from around Serbia have recently joined forces and established the Foster Parents' Association. 
 "Serbian citizens are sensitive to the needs of children without parental care. Still, children with special needs cannot find a place in foster families so easily, not because the families do not want it, but because they do not feel ready and competent enough to do it," says association member Zeljka Vurgund. 
She notes some of the requirements for future foster parents are that they are not under investigation and that they meet certain financial and housing criteria. 
"The moral characteristics and personality of a foster parent are also very important," she adds. 
