23/07/2012
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 23/07/12 
Serbia's Constitutional Court has reinstated 194 judges and 122 prosecutors to their posts, bringing into question the validity of a state judicial reform effort three years ago. 
More than 800 judges failed to be reappointed in 2009 during the judicial reform carried out by the cabinet headed by the former ruling Democratic Party (DP). 
The opposition and the Association of Judges of Serbia disputed the reform, calling it a "political purge." The Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe and the European Parliament also objected. 
The current Constitutional Court's decision on Wednesday (July 18th) is said to be a first step towards the mass return of non-appointed judges to their offices. 
Belgrade Higher Court Judge Omer Hadziomerovic told SETimes that the Constitutional Court's decision could be a problem for the state budget, which will have to pay salaries to all those who return to work. But, he added that on other counts the decision was good, because the judiciary lacks personnel and is strained by numerous unsolved cases. 
"Now is the time to reconsider the entire judicial reform. The main characteristic of the judiciary must be independence and permanence of the judicial post -- if that is not so, the judiciary will not serve the citizens," Hadziomerovic said. 
He added, however, that the state should not "start from scratch" with the judicial reform. "One should look into what was done and what of it is good. We kept starting from zero and never got far," said the judge. 
Experts approve of the Constitutional Court decision, but say its timing is problematic, because it was passed prior to the forming of a new government, in which the final word will belong to the Serbian Progressive Party -- a fervent opponent of the judicial reform. 
Vesna Rakic-Vodinelic, a professor at the Union University Law School, said the decision should have been made in 2010, when the judges who were not reappointed filed appeals. 
"Had the decision been made when the judges filed their appeals, the whole matter would have had a different outcome and we would have been able to say we have one guardian of the rule of law, the Constitutional Court, and then other issues related to earlier decisions of the justice ministry and high council could have been raised," she told SETimes. 
Justice ministry and High Judicial Council officials declined to talk about the decision, but issued a statement saying that the court's decisions were "politically motivated" and could have "many damaging consequences." 
The Constitutional Court decision "returns unworthy judges as providers of courtroom justice, whose work has over the past years been publicly disputed, and among whom are individuals charged with and convicted of serious criminal offenses," the statement said. 
Dragana Boljevic, president of the Association of Judges, told SETimes that the judicial reform "was a political purge and an experiment doomed to fail." 
"If one wants to change the system, one should not change it by replacing certain people," she said. 
According to Boljevic, a successful judiciary requires clear criteria for the evaluation of judges, election of new members, restoring faith in the High Judicial Council, and forming an effectual and economical judicial system. 
