05/01/2010
By Marko Biocina for Southeast European Timesin Zagreb -- 05/01/10
Former Croatian prime minister and honorary president of the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) Ivo Sanader has been expelled from the party in an attempt to block his return to active politics after a six month break. 
The decision was made public by the president of the HDZ, current Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor at a press conference Monday (January 4th). 
"By organising a unilateral press conference and criticising the decisions of the government during the last six months, Sanader caused irreparable damage to the party. There is no doubt that his decision to return to politics at this time is an attempt to destabilise the party and the government, which could endanger key Croatian national interests like finishing the accession negotiations with the European Union during 2010. We couldn't allow this and that's why the party leadership has proposed and the presidium accepted to erase Ivo Sanader from HDZ membership." 
Sanader was voted out of the party by a 13-3 margin. Two members of the presidium abstained from voting. Among the three who voted against expulsion were Parliament Speaker Luka Bebic and former Deputy Prime Minister Damir Polancec, who resigned two months ago after a series of corruption and embezzlement charges against him surfaced. 
The decision to expel Sanader from the HDZ was supported by the party's main partners in the ruling coalition. Josip Friscic, head of Croatian Peasants Party (HSS), the HDZ's strongest political ally, has called Kosor's decision heroic. "She has made it clear to her party members and to the general public that HDZ and the government have only one leader. Expelling Sanader was not an easy decision to make, but she proved that she has firm authority in her party and deserves to be congratulated," said Friscic. 
Darinko Kosor, head of the Croatian Social Liberal Party (HSLS), echoed that sentiment. 
Sanader still retains the right to reinstate his parliamentary mandate by January 15th, but political analysts say he will not have enough support among MPs to cause a significant party break-up or endanger the ruling coalition's majority. 
Sanader's planned a political comeback triggered reactions. News of his return caused Crobex, the benchmark index of the Zagreb Stock Exchange, to fall by 0.6% on a daily basis amid a two-week rally. In a poll conducted by the newspaper Večernji list 84% of participants opposed his return. 
In neighbouring Slovenia, Sanader's announcement was described as a threat to regional stability. Because of his criticism of Kosor's government and claims that he left office six months ago because he was unwilling to trade Croatian territory, Slovenian media emphasised that Sanader's return to power could imperil the arbitration agreement regarding the border dispute between Croatia and Slovenia, which was signed in early November. 
