06/04/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 06/04/06
The second round of talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EU and Serbia-Montenegro was successful, but continuation of the talks depends on full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, according to officials. 
"There is no change in the condition the EC has set concerning progress and that is full co-operation with The Hague tribunal. I hope that the next evaluation of this co-operation will be positive," said Reinhard Priebe, the head of the Directorate for Western Balkans. 
 Priebe, who led the EU negotiating team, said the Wednesday (5 April) round was made possible after the European Commission determined that Belgrade has made a degree of progress in co-operation. That finding came after talks with UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte. 
 Brussels will evaluate the situation again later this month, Priebe said. 
The next round is due in early May, though technical talks -- mostly on trade issues -- will be held before that. According to Priebe, discussions on the possibility of a relaxed visa regime should also begin within weeks. 
"The EU is aware of the fact that this is important to you and it will not be easy. We need certain guarantees," he said. 
The leader of the Serbia-Montenegro negotiating team, Vuk Draskovic, said the key is that negotiations continue. The meeting was "more than successful," he said. 
However, Draskovic cautioned, co-operation with the tribunal remains an outstanding issue that can only be resolved by Belgrade. "The most important thing that needs to be done depends on Serbia-Montenegro alone and that is the extradition of the remaining indictees," he said. 
Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, who headed the Serbian part of the country's negotiating team, said there were two pieces of good news -- firstly, that the talks were resuming and, secondly, that the negotiators had gone through the whole text of the agreement and discussed all open issues. 
He reiterated his belief that the talks, if they continue at this pace, will wrap up by July. 
During the second round, the two sides discussed freedom of movement of the labour force, as well as the final and transitional regulations of the agreement. 
In addition, a plenary session of the Improved Permanent Dialogue with the EU was scheduled for Thursday. Priebe is leading the EU delegation, while Serbia-Montenegro International Economic Relations Minister Predrag Ivanovic represents the state union. The agenda includes monitoring the implementation of recommendations from the European Partnership, political criteria and human and minority rights. 
