29/11/2004
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 29/11/04
The first preliminary results from Sunday's (28 November) general election in Romania show Prime Minister Adrian Nastase and his Social Democrats (PSD) in the lead, but by a smaller margin than exit polls had indicated. 
With about 36 per cent of the votes counted, Nastase leads his main rival in the race for president, Traian Basescu, by a margin of 38 per cent to 35 per cent. Vadim Tudor, the candidate of the nationalist Greater Romania Party (PRM), has about 12 per cent, while Marko Bela of the Hungarian Democratic Alliance of Romania (UDMR) has nearly 7 per cent. Voter turnout was 57 per cent. 
Nastase and Basescu will now face each other in second round of voting, scheduled for 12 December. 
In the parliamentary vote, the PSD-Humanist Party coalition is leading Basescu's Justice and Truth Alliance, composed of the National Liberal Party (PNL) and the Democratic Party (PD), by a razor-thin margin -- 34 per cent to 33 per cent. The PRM has 13 per cent. With about 8 per cent, the UDMR's share of the parliamentary vote is very close to the percentage of Hungarians in the overall population. 
Other parties that were competing in the election failed to pass the 5 per cent threshold for gaining a parliamentary seat, and their presidential candidates received a combined total of 7 per cent of the vote. This figure, however, could become important during the runoff. 
PSD leaders rushed to declare victory. "Romania proved once again it is a solid democracy and that everything PSD has done in the last years was worth it. We won the elections and we will start the negotiations for the new cabinet," Nastase said after the exit poll results were announced. 
Basescu, however, said that no party had obtained more than half of the parliamentary seats or the right to govern Romania alone. "The battle …will take place in the second round of the presidential elections," he said, noting that it is the president who designates the prime minister and gives the mandate to form a government. 
The opposition is also calling for an inquiry into allegations of electoral fraud. Pro Democratia, an independent group that deployed 3,300 monitors around the country, said it had been "submerged with complaints" about voting irregularities, including the bussing of PSD supporters from one polling station to another, as well as the disappearance of hundreds of voting slips. 
Pro Democratia and other NGOs had warned prior to the vote that irregularities could make a difference of up to 3 per cent -- enough to tip the balance in a tight race. 
According to analysts, a number of cabinet scenarios are likely. The ruling alliance could join with the UMDR, some members of the liberal opposition, or even with the nationalist PRM -- though most see this as a last resort. 
"It is known that the EU and the United States are openly against this party, so I strongly believe both the PSD and DA Alliance will avoid it," said Cristian Tudor Popescu, editor-in-chief of the daily Adevarul. 
