25/05/2011
(Blic, Euobserver, EurActiv, Deutsche Welle, FOCUS News Agency - 25/05/11; Beta, B92, Emg.rs, RTT News, Poland.pl, DPA - 24/05/11)
Serbian President Boris Tadic will not attend the upcoming Central and Southeastern European summit in Poland this week if Kosovo participates on an equal footing with other countries from the region, the president's office said on Tuesday (May 24th). 
Kosovo declared independence from Serbia in February 2008, despite Belgrade's strong opposition to the move, and has so far been recognised as a state by 75 countries in the world, including the United States. Poland and the majority of EU nations have done so as well. 
The five members that have not extended recognition are Cyprus, Greece, Romania, Slovakia and Spain. 
Poland has invited Kosovo President Atifete Jahjaga to represent her country in the two-day summit, which opens in Warsaw on Friday. It will bring together a total of some 20 leaders from the region and will be attended also by US President Barack Obama, who will wrap up his European tour with an official visit to Poland. 
The forum will be hosted by President Bronislaw Komorowski, roughly a month before his country takes over the rotating six-month EU presidency from Hungary on July 1st. 
The summit will serve as a venue for one-on-one meetings between regional leaders and Obama. 
Serbia's position is that Kosovo must be represented by UNMIK in international conferences and events. It has been boycotting those in which its former province is granted the same status as other participants. 
Some of the typical diplomatic tricks employed to secure the attendance of both countries in such forums in recent years have been to conduct them without the display of national flags or the titles of officials participating in them. 
It remains unclear whether this will be the case with the event in Poland. An AP report Wednesday said that Polish authorities have agreed to a condition set by Slovakia, which demanded that Kosovo's state symbols – including the national flag and coat of arms -- will not be on display during the meeting, and Jahjaga will not sign any final summit declaration. 
The Polish president's office has not confirmed that Slovakia's request was granted, however. 
Serbia is hoping to be recognised as an official EU candidate and possibly to be given a starting date for its membership talks with the Union during Poland's tenure at the helm of the 27-nation bloc, which end on December 31st. 
Given that goal and the fact that the event is being held in Poland, the summit this week is of crucial importance, the Belgrade-based daily Blic quoted a senior official as saying. 
"The time has come that the policy of the government is reconsidered in order that a more creative solution is found," said Sonja Liht, head of the Foreign Policy Council at the Balkan country's foreign ministry. "That solution has to respect the fact that the circumstances have changed in the meantime. We have started dialogue with Kosovo and accepted it as a side in negotiations. More courageous and determined steps are necessary." 
Komorowski's adviser on international relations, Roman Kuzniar, said his country "respects" Serbia's stance on the issue, while Polish Foreign Minister Radek Sikorski urged Belgrade to "show it has overcome its past demons". 
"Kosovo, so far as I'm aware, is currently recognised by 75 countries, including Poland and most EU members. So there's no reason not to invite Kosovo's representative," the Brussels-based Euobserver news portal quoted him as arguing. 
