04/01/2007
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 04/01/07 
A recent report produced by a presidential commission set up to study the Communist dictatorship exposed many collaborators with the regime and its secret police, the Securitate. Among them, it found, were some prominent Orthodox clergymen. 
The commission, led by Romanian-US scholar Vladimir Tismaneanu, concluded that the Orthodox Church made a "pact with the devil", and that Orthodox Patriarchs, including the current one, Teoctist, were elected "due to their proven loyalty to the Communist Party". 
The church strongly denied those claims, and has taken steps to show the public that it is addressing the issue of clergymen who collaborated with the Communists. But the concrete measures put forward by the Orthodox bishops have fueled speculation that the church seeks special treatment. 
In November, the Synod proposed to the National Council for the Study of Securitate Archives (CNSAS) that a commission formed by "lay, competent people", appointed by the Church, should study the clergy files. This commission would eventually present the Synod with some "objective conclusions". 
The proposal stunned CNSAS members. Some of them considered it an attempt by the Church "to create its own jurisdiction"; while others said it would privilege Orthodoxy against other denominations or even other institutions. 
"It's as if the employees of the Interior Ministry, which collaborated with the Securitate, came and asked for the files and negotiated within the institution," CNSAS member Mircea Dinescu said. "It's ridiculous." 
The Orthodox Church fought back, claiming it was misunderstood. The church-appointed historians in the proposed commission would not influence the CNSAS verdicts, but help the Synod to understand the manner in which some of its clergy might have collaborated, Orthodox Church officials explained. 
Some of those accused have admitted their involvement. The Bishop of Constanta, Teodosie, claims his commitment to the Securitate was "an oath of allegiance for the country and the people …an extension of the military oath". 
The Securitate files may contain new revelations about the Orthodox hierarchy's role in the persecution of the formerly banned Greek Catholics. The daily <i>Romania libera</i> recently reported that Bishop Gherasim Cristea, a member of the current Synod, was a former secret police agent used against Greek-Catholic Cardinal Iuliu Hossu. 
Securitate documents from the CNSAS showed that Cristea spied on the Greek Catholic Cardinal, who was interned from 1956 to 1970 in an Orthodox monastery run by Cristea. The Orthodox bishop, now 92 years old, acknowledged he gave the Securitate written notes concerning Hossu, but denied any acts of political repression. 
The church has not taken disciplinary action against any member of its clergy who has proved to be an informer. A Romanian Patriarchy spokesman said the priests and bishops who admitted their collaboration with the Securitate were "in the limits of the law". 
