03/11/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 03/11/10 
Serbia and Montenegro were due to sign an extradition agreement Tuesday (November 2nd). However, in a gesture signalling their commitment to busting organised crime networks, the two countries went ahead and signed the deal last week, several days ahead of schedule. 
A series of arrests immediately followed. Serbia brought into custody 12 individuals charged by Montenegrin authorities with war crimes. Montenegro, meanwhile, detained six organised crime suspects wanted by Serbia. 
Serbian Justice Minister Snezana Malovic told the media that the agreement was signed prior to the arranged date "because of ongoing investigations". 
"The signing of the agreement lifted obstacles that had over the past year strained relations between the two states," the minister said, adding that Serbia and Montenegro had thus dealt a serious blow to organised crime. 
Montenegrin Interior Minister Ivan Brajovic said his country is "absolutely determined" to arrest all individuals wanted by Serbia who are in Montenegro. Brajovic told the Montenegrin media that the state is ready and has the political will to deal with organised crime. 
The extradition agreement applies to organised crime, corruption, crimes against humanity, money laundering, and war crimes. 
According to Zoran Dragisic, a security professor at the University of Belgrade, suspects "who have been so far hiding behind dual citizenship and other legal loopholes" will now be brought to justice. 
"In Southeast Europe, crime is a highly organised network, in which ethnic differences do not matter in the least. If the states do not have the same kind of good co-operation in the fight against criminals, that battle will be lost in advance," Dragisic told SETimes. 
It is extremely important, he said, for all states in the region to enable the extradition of their citizens to the states that have indicted them, and to ensure efficient trials. 
One high-profile example is accused drug lord Darko Saric's organised crime group, suspected of involvement in smuggling cocaine from South America to Serbia. Three Saric associates -- Goran Sokovic, Drasko Vukovic and Dejan Sekularac -- are still at large. 
Sokovic and Sekularac were arrested in Montenegro earlier this year but were released due to lack of evidence. Now Montenegro has issued an arrest warrant for all three. 
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic said it is very important that members of Saric's group are arrested, in order to "end all speculation". His Montenegrin counterpart, Brajovic, responded by saying the resolve of the Montenegrin authorities should not be doubted. 
"We are completely determined to carry out all activities to the end, meaning that all wanted [by the authorities] and to whom the extradition agreement … refers will be arrested if they are in Montenegro," Brajovic said. 
