19/02/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 19/02/09
Almost 30% of Macedonians -- the highest percentage in the region -- fear a new armed conflict in the Balkans, according to the Balkan Monitor survey. The poll results, presented on Tuesday (February 17th) in Skopje, represent the views of a sample of 1,000 citizens in seven categories: life satisfaction and country development, attitudes towards the EU, satisfaction and trust in the region's institutions, good governance and corruption, migration and mobility, and Balkan challenges (Kosovo, future regional stability and the UN war crimes tribunal). 
The poll -- conducted in September and October 2008 -- is the largest public opinion survey in the region. It is a joint project of the European Fund for the Balkans and the Gallup Agency. 
The Macedonian results, presented by Gallup Europe research analyst Andrzej Pyrka, showed that 46% of respondents are dissatisfied with their lives, the highest such percentage in the region. One third, 33%, think the economy is improving, while a plurality of 49% expressed satisfaction with the government's efforts to tackle organised crime. 
Regarding EU membership, 57% of ethnic Macedonians and 84% of ethnic Albanians in Macedonia see Union membership as desirable. However, asked whether their leaders should change the country's name to allow NATO and EU membership, only 3% of ethnic Macedonian respondents said yes. On the other hand, 69% of ethnic Albanians respondents didn't mind a name change. 
A roundtable discussion titled "Macedonia -- between Hope and Reality" took place at the meeting as well. Participants were unanimous in their views that the survey was very useful and highlighted some paradoxes. Abdulmenaf Bexheti, an economics professor at Southeast European University (SEEU), pointed out the contradiction of Macedonians being relatively satisfied with the government while lamenting the state of the economy. He theorised the inconsistency might stem from the government's success at promoting its own image. 
Vladimir Misev of the Institute for Democracy attributed widespread support for EU membership not to knowledge of the Union but rather to the respondents' emotions. Those lacking firm knowledge of the issue or having irresolute attitudes joined the majority easily. 
SEEU professor Jeton Shasivari said despite the discrepancies, most citizens showed hope for and a realistic attitude towards their country. 
The complete survey and results are available at www.balkan-monitor.eu 
