16/06/2004
(Reuters, Dow Jones, BBC, AFX, Eupolitix, EurActiv, BNN, Novinite, Standartnews - 15/06/04)
Bulgaria concluded its accession negotiations with the EU on Tuesday (15 June), a day after the technical closure of talks on two final negotiating chapters. The deal brings the Balkan country a step closer to its 1 January 2007 entry target. However, if Bulgaria fails to make good on its reform pledges, its formal admission into the 25-nation bloc could be delayed by one year.
Accession negotiations between Bulgaria and the Union started in February 2000. They were completed six months ahead of schedule, during Ireland's rotating EU presidency, which ends on 30 June.
Following a meeting of EU foreign ministers in Luxembourg, Irish Foreign Minister Brian Cowen hailed what he described as a "very positive achievement".
"It sends out a clear signal that momentum is being maintained in the accession process," he said. "This is a major success for Bulgaria."
Bulgarian officials welcomed the milestone. "Our membership in the EU has turned from a distant dream into a close reality," said Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg.
However, both Saxe-Coburg and Foreign Minister Solomon Passy have stressed that the completion of negotiations is not the final phase in the accession process. Discussions with Brussels would continue and the implementation of needed reforms would continue, they said.
The deal reached in Luxembourg includes a "safeguard clause" allowing the EU to postpone Bulgaria's accession by one year if it sees a "serious risk" of the country being unable to implement the required reforms and standards.
"The safeguard clause is in our interest," Passy said Tuesday, adding that it would serve as a guarantee that the reforms will be put into effect. "We are working and we are moving with the right speed in the right direction and everybody is welcome to monitor our progress."
Bulgaria is expected to step up its fight against organised crime and corruption, implement judiciary and public administration reforms, and carry out all other commitments made during the talks, including the early closure of two Soviet-era reactors at the Kozloduy nuclear power plant in 2006.
Under its agreements with the EU, the country will receive 240m euros, in addition to the already announced funding of 4.4 billion euros under the Union's 2007-2009 budget.
Prior to the signing of the membership treaty, expected to take place in June 2005, the European Commission will issue its regular report on Bulgaria's accession progress, to be released in October this year. Based on the findings and recommendations in the report, the EU leaders will decide whether to approve the country's admission during their summit in December.
