24/03/2010
(EurActiv, Nine O'clock - 24/03/10; European Commission, AFP, DPA, Bloomberg, Euobserver, The Sofia Echo, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, Mediafax - 23/03/10)
Although Bulgaria and Romania have taken steps towards EU standards in judicial reform and the fight against organised crime and corruption in the last six months, the European Commission (EC) said on Tuesday (March 23rd) that the measures have not translated into tangible results. 
The remarks came in the EC's bi-annual technical updates on the two countries' progress in those critical areas. 
The reports, under the Co-operation and Verification Mechanism, also criticised Bulgaria and Romania for the lack of convictions in cases of high-level corruption since 2007, when both countries joined the EU. 
 "The European Commission urges authorities in Bulgaria and Romania to step up their efforts, especially in turning arrests and indictments into final sentences," commission spokesman Mark Gray said on Tuesday, while presenting the papers at a news conference in Brussels. 
The report on Bulgaria said that numerous new initiatives suggest a will -- if not results -- by the new centre-right government to reform. These projects include the establishment of joint investigation teams on corruption, organised crime and the abuse of EU funds. Other "laudable" efforts included the reforms of the National Revenue Agency and the State Customs Agency. 
 "Although their merit can only be assessed in the light of their effective contribution to the fight against corruption and organised crime once they are implemented, Bulgaria's recent efforts demonstrate a growing recognition that substantial and far-reaching reforms are required," the EC said. 
The report was more critical of the role of the Bulgarian judiciary in fighting organised crime and corruption. 
 "Allegations of serious corruption related to senior appointments in the judiciary involving members of the Supreme Judicial Council still need to be fully examined," noted the EU's executive arm. "A quicker and more complete administrative follow-up to the Commission's concerns regarding irregularities, conflict of interest and fraud in the implementation of EU funds needs to be implemented before the next assessment." 
That assessment is due in July. 
The report listed six recommendations for Bulgaria. They include the adoption of constitutional amendments removing ambiguity regarding the independence and accountability of the judicial system, steps to ensure a more transparent and efficient judicial process, and other repairs. 
The report on Romania, while less critical, noted the country's failure to maintain the momentum of reform it had established by mid-2009. The recent presidential election and difficulties surrounding the formation of a new government were cited as reasons for delaying parliamentary discussion of key legislation, particularly a draft of civil and criminal procedure codes. 
 Recommendations for Romania included improving the transparency and efficiency of the judicial process, establishing an integrity agency and ensuring that investigations into high-level corruption are conducted in a professional, non-partisan manner. 
"Only limited results can be demonstrated in judicial reform, while no effective improvement could be noted for the difficult human resourcing situation in the judiciary, and the capacity of the judicial system has been put under further strain by net staff losses," the EC said. 
According to the report, the penalties applied by Romanian courts for high-level corruption were "generally too lenient". 
