31/07/2006
(Reuters, DPA - 29/07/06; Beta - 28/07/06)
Belgrade is finally showing the political will to arrest former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic, a Serbian daily quoted chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte as saying. 
"Since the action plan was adopted, I think the political will to arrest Mladic exists for the first time," she told the Belgrade-based daily Vecernje Novosti. "I would like to see the operational plan and be involved." 
Her comments, published on Saturday (29 July), came less than two weeks after Serbian authorities announced an action plan for achieving full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), a key condition for Euro-Atlantic integration. The document sets the location, arrest and extradition of Mladic and other war crimes suspects wanted by The Hague tribunal as its principal aim. 
Mladic and former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic are the ICTY's two most-wanted indictees. Both are under indictment for genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo. 
Insisting that Mladic is hiding in Serbia, del Ponte has repeatedly criticised the Belgrade authorities for dragging their feet. 
"I personally think that the Serbian authorities were not searching for Mladic to arrest him but to have him surrender," Reuters quoted the prosecutor as telling Vecernje Novosti. "They were trying to disable his helpers and send him the message he should surrender," she added. 
Serbia's failure to deliver Mladic to The Hague tribunal led to the suspension of talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU. Brussels has made it clear that resuming negotiations hinges on Belgrade's full co-operation with the ICTY. 
Thanking the EU for pressuring Belgrade to meet its obligations to the UN tribunal, del Ponte voiced hope that the 25-nation bloc would keep that condition. She appeared confident that the Belgrade authorities' action plan would lead to Mladic's arrest. 
"For the first time I believe that the Serbian government will arrest Mladic and that is why I am not setting any new deadlines," German news agency Deutsche Presse Agentur quoted the prosecutor as saying. 
Shortly after Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica presented the action plan to EU officials on 17 July, the government appointed special war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic and the head of Serbia's National Council for co-operation with the ICTY, Rasim Ljajic, as those responsible for supervising and overseeing its implementation. 
"It is important to show our good will because co-operation with The Hague tribunal puts Serbia in a different position, especially when it comes to European integration and negotiations on Kosovo," Serbian news agency Beta quoted Kostunica as saying on Friday. 
The six-point plan is said to include a media campaign aimed at persuading the Serbian public that Mladic must be brought to justice in The Hague. 
