22/11/2007
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 22/11/07
Two weeks ago, the American Corners programme in Bitola celebrated its fourth anniversary. More than 60 guests -- including Public Affairs Officer Ryan Rowlands and Bitola Mayor Vladimir Talevski -- attended the event. Launched as a pilot-project of American Corners in Macedonia, the Bitola programme began in October 2003. In four years, it has developed into a respectable cultural centre with more than 1,500 members. 
American Corners, modeled after US public libraries, seek to provide free information on the general public about the United States. The one in Bitola was the first. A second has since opened in Skopje, with nearly 3,000 members, and a third is planned for Tetovo. 
 "The American Corners are the spirit of the United States. People say that when you enter the American Corner it is the same as going to America," US Embassy Public Affairs Officer Amy Storrow said. 
The Corners feature book collections, magazines, a CD-ROM database, internet access and local programmes intended for the general public. Topics covered include US history, the US government, economics, society, values and the English language. There are also brochures available that cover the media, education, art, culture, economics, and efforts to stop terrorism and trafficking. 
"An American Corner is a resource centre, where students, teachers, businesspeople, government and [NGO] leaders, journalists, researchers and the general public can come to learn more about the United States," said former US Ambassador to Macedonia Lawrence E. Butler, who opened the Skopje location in January 2005. 
The Corners serve as alumni centres where Macedonian citizens who have been to the United States on exchange programmes can gather and keep in touch with their US contacts. They also host a variety of events designed to bring Americans and Macedonians closer together. These programmes include video and DVD screenings, exhibits, round table discussions, seminars, mini conferences and workshops, as well as presentations by embassy officials, Fulbright scholars, students and distinguished guest speakers from the United States. 
There are hundreds of American Corners throughout the world, including many in Southeast Europe -- including in Albania, Cyprus, Greece and Serbia. 
