23/12/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 23/12/04
On 2 January, Croatians will go the polls to elect a president from among several candidates. As of now, incumbent Stipe Mesic appears to have the best chance of winning, followed by Deputy Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor, the candidate of the ruling HDZ party. 
Many analysts believe the main question is whether Mesic, who enjoys the support of seven political parties and is well ahead in the polls, will win in the first round. If he succeeds, says political commentator Davor Djenero, "His real powers and authority in the political system will increase significantly. In spite of the fact that the authority of the President of the Republic is fairly limited, he proved during his current mandate that he can operate as an important guarantor of democratisation and, conditionally speaking, as a pillar of the political system." 
Kosor, however, has made clear that she intends to mount a serious challenge. "I'm convinced that with the mobilisation of party forces and the support of all groups that recognise what the party and I personally have done, we can almost certainly win the elections," Kosor said, adding that her advantage lies in the fact that she can draw support from both male and female voters. Kosor's campaign has received the backing of 40 women's NGOs. 
Even before she entered the race, she said, polls showed she had a satisfactory rating of 17 per cent with respect to Mesic -- a figure which she now expects will substantially increase. 
Mesic himself is not underestimating the challenge, noting that the government, prime minister and the ruling HDZ party are all allied against him. "It is clear that I can no longer mount a campaign against an indistinct group," he said, adding that he has had to shift his election strategy as a result. 
While several other candidates entered the race, most are expected to win less than one per cent of the vote, while two -- Slaven Letica and Djurdj Adlesic -- stand a chance of winning five per cent at best. These candidates could, nevertheless, play a significant role, since analysts believe they will chip away at Mesic's support and indirectly benefit Kosor. 
