13/04/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/04/05
The European Commission (EC) confirmed that Serbia-Montenegro has made enough progress to start talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU, obtaining a positive Feasibility Report for the federal union Tuesday (12 April). Serbia-Montenegro is the only country in the region that does not have institutionalised relations with the EU. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said the positive Feasibility Study represents the beginning of Serbia-Montenegro's road to Europe. Rehn said he anticipates the launch of SAA talks to be held under the so-called twin track model, in November or December. He said he was satisfied with the significant progress in co-operation with The Hague tribunal that the state has made, but cautioned that negotiations on admission into the EU would not be considered as long as full co-operation with the tribunal is lacking. 
"This trend must continue until none of the remaining indictees is still at large," Rehn said. He added that accession talks for Serbia-Montenegro "could not even be considered" until Belgrade turns in the two top war crime suspects -- Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. Rehn gave no indication on when the state union could achieve EU candidate status, saying it depends on its co-operation with The Hague and fulfilling other conditions. 
 Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica voiced satisfaction with the positive rating to the Feasibility Study, describing it as "the first and decisive step" towards full membership in the EU. 
"Now that we have gotten the study, we can say that we have stepped on the road to Europe which certainly leads to the EU. Many more difficult steps must be taken on that road, but now there are neither reasons nor internal obstacles not to make those steps with even more hope and even more realistic expectations," Kostunica said. 
He added the government is prepared "to work persistently and tenaciously" towards European integration, and said the citizens of Serbia are "unreservedly oriented towards the EU and the European state union of Serbia-Montenegro". 
Serbian President Boris Tadic said the country should do everything possible to get a favourable decision from the EU Ministerial Council on 25 April. "Today's decision means that our country is capable of joining the EU in the future. The time for this to happen depends on us, on economic and structural reforms which our society is facing," Tadic said. "All those who are in any way obstructing co-operation with The Hague tribunal do not wish Serbia to solve its economic and vital problems," Tadic said. 
Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic said that state union had crossed an important point in European integration. Marovic warned that many more obligations await the state union, but if Serbia-Montenegro sustains and strengthens its efforts, it would make up for lost time with the support of the EU. "Co-operation with The Hague tribunal must continue until the final fulfillment of all obligations towards that institution," Marovic said. 
EU security chief Javier Solana congratulated Marovic on the positive Feasibility Study. "This is an important step, especially for you in Serbia-Montenegro. I believe that Serbia-Montenegro will progress in this process," Solana said. 
