17/01/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 17/01/07
The success of UNMIK's Civil Administration department has helped pave the way for local administration to take over many of its duties. Despite a series of hurdles since its inception in 1999, the mission says it is pleased with what the department has accomplished. 
"The challenges were many, but the goal remained clear: develop capacity and then transfer responsibility to local institutions as soon as it was feasible to do so," said Civil Administration Director Patricia Waring. "We are justifiably proud of the dedication and professionalism of all our colleagues who have given so much to Kosovo. Their efforts have been an outstanding example of what a committed team of peacekeepers can accomplish." 
Following the 1998-1999 conflict, the department helped set up the ministries of Kosovo's first democratically elected government, established government structures at the local and central levels, and ensured the provision of basic services. 
Hundreds of international specialists from various walks of life -- public administration, finance, agriculture, health, education, urban development, transport, communications, and justice -- joined the Civil Administration to assist with this mammoth task. 
The department also took the reins in terms of reconstruction projects. Officials say the mission has rebuilt 17,000 houses, paving the way for the return of over 120,000 people. 
"The Civil Administration has also constructed and reconstructed eight hospitals, 32 main family health centres and over 330 smaller healthcare facilities, besides working to rebuild the education infrastructure," a UNMIK press release said. 
To facilitate Kosovo citizens' ability to travel, the administration issued more than two million ID cards and travel documents in the past seven years. "By providing these documents, Civil Administration has created a highly accurate civil register that serves as the basis for voter registration as well," UNMIK said. 
The former Housing and Property Directorate (HPD) -- which operated under the administration until last year -- has resolved more than 29,000 property claims and taken over 2,700 properties under direct administration. The HPD's responsibilities have been transferred to the Kosovo Property Agency. 
As part of a major restructuring launched by UNMIK in 2005, the Civil Administration was dissolved and replaced by the much smaller Department of Civil Administration (DCA). 
The DCA retains an executive role in limited areas, but its main focus is mentoring, monitoring and advising provincial administrations. 
