30/07/2004
By Mustafa Azizoglu for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 30/07/04
In a move seen as acknowledging Turkish Cypriot support for international efforts to reunify Cyprus, the European Commission (EC) has announced a set of proposals which include liberalising trade with the northern part of the island, as well as a grant of 259m euros.
EU Enlargement Commissioner Guenter Verheugen said the EU remains committed to its long-term goal of reunifying the Greek and Turkish parts of Cyprus. "The aim of the package is to bring the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community to an end, and we're using different instruments in doing so," he said.
During a referendum held on 24 April, Greek Cypriots rejected a UN-sponsored reunification plan, while Turkish Cypriots approved it. As a result of the split vote, only the Greek part of Cyprus entered the EU on 1 May.
"It would be unfair, to say the least, to leave [Turkish Cypriots] out in the cold," Verheugen said.
The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC), which is recognised only by Turkey, has been under an international embargo and sanctions since 1974. Turkish Cypriot products currently cannot be exported abroad under the name of TRNC. The new proposals, however, will allow free trade with Northern Cyprus except for foodstuffs.
Among potential EU-financed projects, Verheugen listed examples such as sewage treatment plants, the rehabilitation of copper mines, and -- in the longer term -- tourism ventures, agricultural support and infrastructure projects involving electricity and telecommunications. He said the EU will seek to promote joint projects involving both Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot authorities.
The proposals, which would go into effect after the European Council meets in September, also include regulation of the trade across the "Green Line" separating the island's two communities.
While the EC's action represents a major political milestone for Turkish Cypriots, Verheugen repeatedly stressed that the proposals do not constitute direct or indirect recognition of the TNRC. "We have certainly not the slightest interest to see a Turkish ministate in the eastern Mediterranean," he said.
Nevertheless, the set of proposals has been greeted with concern by Greece and Greek Cypriots. Greek Foreign Ministry spokesman Giorgos Koumoutsakos describing the idea of direct EU contact with the TNRC in economic matters as "a negative point". Greek Cypriot Foreign Minister Giorgos Iakovou, meanwhile, said the package is based on the wrong political assumptions and on laws that lack a solid foundation.
The Greek side is especially opposed to the free trade provisions, over which it lacks the power of veto. But neither Greece nor the Greek Cypriots are expected to object to the 259m-euro aid grant, which requires a unanimous vote by the European Council.
