01/07/2010
(Euobserver, Zaman, World Bulletin - 01/07/10; AFP, Reuters, BBC, DPA, VOA, Euobserver, World Bulletin, EU - 30/06/10)
Croatia took a major step towards fulfilling its goal of joining the EU on Wednesday (June 30th), as the last three policy-related chapters in its entry talks were officially opened during a ministerial-level conference in Brussels. 
Zagreb began its accession negotiations with the Union in October 2005. Of all 35 chapters that the process is broken into, 20 have been provisionally closed and discussions on another 12 were under way prior to the meeting in Brussels. 
The talks launched on Wednesday will cover competition policy, judiciary and fundamental rights, as well as foreign, security and defence policy. The remaining two chapters are considered just a formality, as they are automatically closed at the end of the accession negotiations. 
While noting that the final phase of the process will be tough, Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor voiced confidence Wednesday that her country would be able to wrap up its entry talks by the end of this year and then join the EU as its 28th member by 2012. 
 Croatia's ambitions at the start of its membership negotiations were to gain admission much earlier. But its border dispute with neighbouring Slovenia turned into a major obstacle in late 2008, when Ljubljana decided to block Zagreb's EU bid over the issue. As a result, Croatia's membership talks remained deadlocked until October of last year. 
The border dispute hurdle was finally removed by the June 6th referendum in Slovenia, when the majority of voters there backed a deal to resolve the issue via international arbitration. 
But, Ljubljana also warned recently that it might block the provisional closure of the competition chapter in Zagreb's talks over another open issue. Slovenia wants Croatia to let its largest bank, Nova Ljubljanska Banka (NLB), enter its market. But Croatia's central bank has made clear that will not happen until the outstanding debts of NLB's predecessor, the now defunct Ljubljanska Banka, to Croatian depositors are settled. 
Speaking after Wednesday's meeting in Brussels, Croatian Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic told reporters that Zagreb could sign the EU accession treaty by the end of March 2011. 
"The sooner Croatia enters, the better for the rest of the Western Balkans," Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos said on Wednesday, just hours before his country's six-month term at the EU helm came to a close. "We have taken an irreversible step on the path towards the accession of Croatia." 
The end of the Spanish EU presidency was also marked by the opening of a new chapter in Turkey's accession talks, which were also launched in October 2005. 
The decision to begin discussions on the food safety and veterinary health policy area brought the total number of opened chapters to 13, with only one of all 35 provisionally closed so far. 
 Turkey's sluggish reform progress, its refusal to open its airports and ports to traffic from EU member Cyprus, as well as the insistence of some of the bloc's heavy-hitters that it should be offered some sort of a "privileged partnership" instead of full-fledged membership, are the main reasons for the slow pace of Ankara's talks. 
While some downplayed the significance of the chapter that was opened Wednesday, Moratinos reassured Turkey that it is an important move forward on its EU integration path. 
"These are technical issues, but they carry great political importance as well, because they show that the negotiation process is still very much alive and making progress," he told reporters after an accession conference with Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu. 
