06/08/2009
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 06/08/09
A small, but growing, old-fashioned town about 150km west of Athens -- Akrata -- is one of the most beautiful seaside resorts on the Corinthian Gulf. 
The Akrata settlement is full of stunning scenery, with breathtaking views of cliffs, pine trees and the Krathi River, which flows through the town to east of Cape Akrata. 
South of Akrata, tourists can visit Lake Tsvilou and neighbouring settlements including Solos and Zarouchla. The abundance of natural beauty in Akrata makes it a great place to hike. 
The town's beach, where the hotels are located, is a few kilometers northeast towards the Cape. 
Akrata also offers a great selection of taverns, restaurants and bars, lining the town's seaside promenade, which is ideal for an evening stroll. 
The pebbly beach is well shaded by trees and has a good-sized walkway. There are several excellent places to surf, where waves sweep in and crash against the coast. 
A surge of modern hotels and private tourist facilities sprung up in Akrata in the last decade. But despite the new luxury accommodations, many visitors opt to stay at the town's popular beach campsite. 
Some travelers divvy up their time, and visit the local beaches in surrounding villages, such as Trapeza, Platonos and Egira. 
There is a wide range of cultural activities in Akrata according to Efi Hatzigrigoriou, municipality representative. 
"Visitors can take advantage of the carnival that has been evolved to an annual establishment and it's held every spring. The religious holiday of the Salvation, observed on August 6th, and the various cultural events during the summer are among the major tourist attractions," said Hatzigrigoriou. 
The ancient city of Egira and its amphitheatre is located right next to Akrata, and the 17th century Monastery of Holy Trinity (Agia Tria) can be found in the town's suburbs. 
For athletes, tennis courts and mini soccer fields were built recently --- and if all of that running around has caused you to build up an appetite, the local food is exquisite. Lambros Grill Tavern, which has tables directly adjacent to the town's beach, is particularly popular. 
