06/02/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 03/01/05
Southeast European Times: What are the most serious problems and challenges faced by the Macedonian judiciary? 
Lence Sofronievska: Analyses of the judiciary in Macedonia point to its insufficient institutional, organisational, constitutional and legal adjustment. Inadequate institutional positioning of the judiciary implies its insufficient independence from the legislative and executive authorities, and sluggishness and long durability of court trials make the judiciary inefficient and cause anxiety among the citizens in our country. Offsetting such unfavourable conditions requires the development of an operational and efficacious judiciary based on European legal standards. 
SE Times: The government has approved a judicial reform strategy. What innovations does it propose? 
Sofronievska: The necessity of changes in the selection, election and dismissal of judges, in the education of judges and prosecutors and in the funding of the judiciary -- together with changes in the organisational positioning and responsibilities of courts, simplification of procedures, introduction of an info-tech system, enrichment of human resources and adherence to the principle of fair representation of members of the ethnic communities, in line with European standards -- are emphasised as the guarantee for strengthening the independence of the judiciary. 
SE Times: Will change in the way judges are elected facilitate the judiciary’s independence from the executive and legislative authorities? 
Sofronievska: Practice thus far has shown some anomalies in the system of electing judges. Overcoming such conditions in order to reinforce independence of the judiciary requires redefining the position, role and structure of the Republic Judiciary Council. The establishment, in the 1991 constitution, of a special expert body for the selection of judges was a large step forward compared to the previous period, when the Macedonian Parliament elected judges directly. But it proved to be insufficient because the judiciary authority had a secondary role in the election and it was the parliament which had the final say. 
The reform strategy for the judiciary system anticipates that the majority of the Republic Judiciary Council will consist of judges elected in direct voting by judges themselves. Another part of the Council membership will be elected by parliament and the president. In this way, the tendency of the Macedonian judiciary towards independence and self-reliance will be accomplished because the election of new judges and the progress of the existing judges will depend mainly on the judiciary. 
SE Times: Macedonia has been frequently criticised for its inefficient judiciary, drawn-out proceedings and backlog of unsolved cases. Do you think this will reflect on Macedonia’s acceptance to the EU? 
Sofronievska: Macedonia’s EU accession is conditioned on successful judicial reform in line with the European and international standards. The faster we realise obligations undertaken in the Stabilisation and Association Agreement, the faster we will become part of the system of EU members and will operate as part of the European judiciary. 
SE Times: Constitutional changes relating to the judiciary are being announced. What kind of changes are these? 
Sofronievska: Independence of the judiciary is jeopardised by the system of election and dismissal of judges. Professionalism in performing the office of judge will strengthen with the reform of that system as well as with redefinition of the organisation and responsibility of courts. Constitutional amendments covering the election of judges as well as the composition and role of the Republic Judiciary Council are anticipated. A new constitutional solution should anticipate that responsibility for resolving slight violations in traffic, customs, financial and economic operations lies with administrative bodies, while ensuring constitutional and legal guarantees for the court protection of citizens against illegal acts of the state administration. Upon the approval of the constitutional amendments, a new law on violations that will govern the procedure of administrative bodies and courts will be proposed. 
 SE Times: In your opinion, is the inefficient judiciary one of the main obstacles to foreign investment? 
Sofronievska: Analysis of the operation of courts points to increasing anomalies in the efficacy of the judiciary. That could have a great negative impact on direct foreign investments in Macedonia. The long duration of trials deriving from the illegal establishment of debtor-creditor relations implies the distrust foreign investors have in the process of executing the violated rights. There is still a concept of favouring the debtor at the expense of the creditor, as well as abuse of process authorisations by parties involved in procedures. In addition, there is a lack of corresponding registries and records for delivering information on debtors to the parties. All this gives rise to a feeling of uncertainty among foreign investors. 
SE Times: What is the current level of compatibility of the Macedonian judiciary with the European one, and what should be done for full harmonisation? 
 Sofronievska Most national laws relating to the judiciary that have to be adjusted to the legal acts of the EU have already been passed, including the law on the independent judiciary budget, the law on the public prosecution office, amendments to the criminal code, the law on criminal procedure and the law on lawsuit court procedure. Adoption of the Strategy for Reform of the Judiciary anticipates completion of the whole set of relevant laws by the end of 2005, in order to build a functional system based on European legal standards. Amendments to the Law on Courts relating to organisation of the judiciary are necessary, along with a new law on administrative disputes that will transfer this matter to the responsibility of another first instance court. Passage of a law on offences, and more effective law enforcement, are also necessary. 
SE Times: What is the anticipated role of the state-run school for judges? 
Sofronievska: Establishing a state school for the education of judges and public prosecutors is a priority law defined in the Strategy for Reform of the Judiciary. The conditions for enrollment will be legally defined and based on the previous examination of the professional qualities of graduate lawyers. In this way, an educated staff of future judges will be prepared and only candidates from the ranks of those who have completed this school will be elected as judges. 
SE Times: How consistently is Macedonia applying the principle of fair and adequate representation of communities in the judiciary? 
Sofronievska: Amendments to the Law on Judges anticipate that corresponding and just representation of citizens from all communities should be ensured without violating the criteria established by law. To execute this provision and enable members of ethnic communities to use their language in court procedures, an analysis of the need for members of ethnic communities in the Macedonian courts has been made, together with financial estimates. Measures have been taken and funds allotted in the 2005 state budget for the employment of 200 members of ethnic communities in the judicial administration. At the same time, implementation of the constitutional and legal provisions on representation of the members of communities in courts will be a continuing activity. 
When proposing candidates for election for judges, special attention is paid to the principle of just and adequate representation of the communities, in particular with respect to the election of judges in all court instances in Macedonia. In 2004, the Republic Judiciary Council proposed -- and parliament elected -- 47 judges. Thirteen were members of the Albanian ethnic community, one was a member of the Serb community and one was from the Turkish community. Thus, 30 per cent of the candidates proposed were members of ethnic communities. 
