23/09/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 23/09/09
Romanian President Traian Basescu delivered a speech to parliament on September 15th. He took responsibility for three bills, including one aimed at kick starting education reform in the country. 
According to the legislation, at least 6% of GDP will be set aside for the education sector. A 500-euro account will be established for each student, becoming available to them at age 14. 
In addition to financing measures, education under the new legislation will deviate from quantitative learning to a more qualitative approach. 
A virtual library will be set up for children, so they can access educational resources, and assessments, such as PISA, TIMSS and PIRLS, will be given to monitor their progress. Report cards will also be issued to parents at the end of each school cycle. 
 School directors will be prohibited from having any political affiliation in the workplace under the law, which also bans political propaganda in schools. 
Last year, parliament passed the Pact on Education, which cleared the path for the recent bill. 
"The signing of the Pact on Education will be an important moment for the future of the younger generations of Romania," said Basescu. 
Although some in the education field welcomed the pact, others considered it merely a political tool that would not function without steps taken to reform Romania's ailing education system. 
"I've witnessed my son go through all the phases of the so-called reform: starting with the alternative manuals and until the recent school-leaving examination," Doina Cochilet told SETimes. 
"Imagine the state of confusion sometimes the pupils had to cope with, since even the teachers were more baffled than them and couldn't explain to us the purpose of that avalanche of changes," said Cochilet, a 38-year-old real estate agent whose son just graduated from secondary school. 
Another issue plaguing education is poor pay for teachers, a factor that has turned underpaid teachers away from the field in search of a more lucrative profession. The substitutes taking their places are not always qualified. 
"Many parents hire private tutors because they no longer trust the teachers they have at school. And thus there's been some sort of tacit competition between the kids at school because the parents of those who don't have private tutors fear their children will fall behind and resort to them in the end," said Nicoleta Soare, a 29-year-old parent who works as a lawyer's assistant in Bucharest. 
Despite reforms, the latest PIRLS examination results show a decline in scores, down 14 spots from 2001. 
Education reform is a requirement for the country to receive approximately 20 billion euros from the IMF. 
