22/06/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 22/06/10
EU Member of Parliament and leader of the National Council of the Hungarians in Transylvania (CNMT) Laszlo Tokes won one of the European Parliament's (EP) 14 vice-president posts after securing 334 votes.
Tokes represents the European People's Party (EPP) group in the EP, and will replace Hungarian Pal Schmitt, who is moving on to head the newly formed parliament in Budapest.
"I will do my utmost to represent the interests of my country [Romania] in the spirit of protecting human rights, rights of minorities and religious liberties, as well as the European and Christian values," said Tokes, prior to the June 15th vote.
He also said he will strive to "take the former communist countries of Central and Eastern Europe out of isolation".
Tokes' success was shadowed by a series of technical glitches during the vote. Many of the EP lawmakers claimed the tallies exceeded the number of those present in the hall. Others complained the voting procedure was confusing, initially showing the options "for" or "against", while subsequent directions also included an "abstain" option.
Romanian parties represented in the EP showed fierce opposition to the Hungarian minority's representative.
The Liberals unanimously decided to vote against Tokes three days before the EP vote. "We will see what will Tokes do at that position, whether he will give up his less poised attitude and pursue a general European well-being, and not niche policies oriented towards the Hungarians only," Liberal EP lawmaker Adina Valean was quoted as saying by Mediafax.
The Liberal Democrats, who are also members of the EPP and upheld Tokes' candidacy, were critical that the rightist Hungarian ruling party Fidez forwarded Tokes' nomination.
Social Democrat EP lawmaker Corina Cretu said she is worried by his election.
"I don't think the EP needs a vice-president who attacks the current border system within the EU by asking for the annulment of the Trianon Treaty, as well as supports the ethnically-based territorial division nurtured by extremist parties," said Cretu.
The treaty re-established the borders of Hungary after WWI, when the country lost 72% of the territory it controlled previously. Corneliu Vadim-Tudor, of the far-right Greater Romania Party, also lambasted Tokes' election.
Covasna is the correct name of the Romanian county ("who are the majority in Harghita and Covansa counties in central Romania"). 
"We are trying to internationalise the cause of the Hungarians' autonomy in Transylvania and Szeklersland," Tokes said last June.
In April, he alerted the EP that the Romanian government is "continuing the homogenisation and Romanisation of Transylvania through the method of artificial change of the ethnic proportions".
