13/10/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 13/10/09
Romanians were exhilarated when the Nobel committee announced on Friday (October 8th) that a Romanian-born German author -- Herta Muller -- was selected as the winner of this year's Nobel Prize for Literature. 
Muller was distinguished for her work describing life in Romania during the communist regime of Nicolae Ceausescu. The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences described her as a writer "who, with the concentration of poetry and the frankness of prose, depicts the landscape of the dispossessed". 
 "I am so surprised that I still cannot believe it," said Muller. 
One day after the Nobel committee's announcement, Muller downplayed any link between the prize and the 20-year period since the fall of the Berlin Wall. 
 "I don't think the prize has something to do with this, but what I wrote has something to do with the communist regime. … In my mind, communism isn't over yet," said Muller. 
In her interview with the Nobel committee, Muller explained she is still writing about Romania because "literature is born there where there's the highest degree of emotional charge. I lived more than 30 years of my life under dictatorship, those were the obstacles I ran into, it wasn't me who looked for those themes, they looked for me." 
Muller is better known in Germany than in her native Romania. Shortly after the Nobel committee's announcement however, the Romanian media rushed to Muller's village of Nitchidorf near Timisoara to learn more about her. 
Born in 1953, Muller recalled that her village was entirely inhabited by Germans; she learned Romanian only when she was a teenager. Her mother was deported by the communist authorities to a labour camp in Ukraine. Muller passionately described the exile of Romania's Germans to Soviet labour camps in her book "Atemschaukel", released earlier this year. 
At university, she joined a German-language authors' circle seeking freedom of speech -- an ideal that ran counter to Romania's communist regime doctrine. Following Muller's graduation, she worked as translator in an industrial enterprise, but was fired in 1979 after refusing to become an informant for the secret police, Securitate. Afterwards, Muller was constantly harassed by the regime. 
Her debut work, "Niederungen" (Nadirs, 1982), was subjected to communist censorship. "Criticism over and over again, such destructive criticism that one wonders what is the use of these texts," reads the Securitate agent's report. 
Muller left Romania in 1987 when the Causescu regime blocked the publishing of her books. Since settling in the West, she has won important national and international literary awards, including the Ricarda Huch (1987), the Kleist (1994) and Joseph Breitbach (2003), the Aristeion Prize (1995) and the international IMPAC Dublin Literary Award (1998). 
Muller was nominated for the Nobel Prize three times on behalf of Germany since 1999. "The Oppressive Tango", "The Passport" and "The Appointment" are among her best known books. 
This is the third Nobel prize won by a Romanian-born person. George Emil Palade won a Nobel prize for medicine in 1974 and Elie Wiesel for peace in 1986. 
