25/01/2007
By Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 25/01/07 
Four men accused of conspiring to launch terror attacks in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) or elsewhere in Europe were found guilty on January 14th by the BiH Court in Sarajevo. 
The trial panel ruled that Mirsad Bektasevic and Abdulkadir Cesur had bought explosives with the intent to commit a terrorist act, and that Bajro Ikanovic and Senad Hasanovic assisted them in the effort. Bektasevic, 19, is a citizen of Sweden, while Cesur, 18, is a Turkish national who had been living in Denmark. The other two men are Bosnians. 
Bektasevic, Cesur, Ikanovic and Hasanovic were sentenced to 15, 13, 8 and 2 1/2 years in prison, respectively. 
At least 19kg of explosives were found in Bektasevic's possession, Presiding Judge Mirza Jusufovic noted. The accused had also made a suicide belt, which was ready-for-use at the time of his arrest. 
Police also discovered guns and other factory-made explosives, various other gadgets that could have been used as time bomb triggers and a videotape with footage demonstrating how to make and use explosives. 
On the videotape, a voice could be heard saying "Allah Akbar, these weapons will be used against those that murder our brothers and send their soldiers to Iraq and Afghanistan." The voice was that of Bektasevic. 
"The possession of explosive devices, weapons and other materials of the defendant, with the intention to be used in a terrorist act, represent willful actions that can cause serious harm to BiH and its government, as well as international organisations currently in BiH," Jusufovic said. 
Bektasevic and Cesur assaulted police who came to arrest them, a circumstance that was also taken into account when reaching the verdict. 
The trial panel said it had rejected defence arguments that Bektasevic and Cesur were simply in Sarajevo to celebrate Ramadan. 
Semso Temin, Bektasevic's lawyer, argued that no terrorist act had taken place. At most, he said, the accused should receive three years for illegal possession of weapons and explosive materials. 
The verdict "is a drastic and unusual punishment", Temin said, vowing to appeal. 
"We still claim that there is no evidence that a criminal act of terrorism took place. We will appeal the case and see how things go from there," said defence lawyer Idriz Kamenica. 
