29/06/2004
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 29/06/04
Just two months before the start of the Summer Olympics, host city Athens held the largest shipping industry trade show in the world. The Posidonia exhibition, which is held biennially, took place at the Port of Piraeus Exhibition Centre from 7 June to 11 June, and attracted more than 20,000 visitors from around the globe.
Covering 23,000 square metres and attracting a record number of 1,650 exhibitors from 74 countries, Posidonia showcased Greece's leading position in international shipping. The Greek shipping industry boasts 4,000 vessels with a total capacity of 170m dead weight tonnage (dwt) and a current order book of 400 new building berths at major international shipyards.
This year's exhibition was also considered a major test event for Greece ahead of the Summer Games in August.
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis, who attended the trade show, spoke about the immense contribution the shipping industry has made to the country's economy. He paid tribute to the hard work of Greek ship owners and seafarers, praising them for establishing the Greek-owned fleet as the largest in the world.
Greek Mercantile Marine Minister Manolis Kefaloyiannis and Turkish Minister of Transport Binali Yildirim both visited Posidonia and toured exhibitor pavilions.
"The importance of Greece to the maritime world, as well as the importance of the shipping sector to Greece, are two facts which cannot be disputed. It is also important to note that 28 per cent of the world's annual production of new shipbuilding is generated by Greek ship owning companies, while it is also estimated that shipping and shipping-related activities provide employment to more than 200,000 people in Greece," Kefaloyiannis said.
"Posidonia is a very well known maritime exhibition and our Turkish ship owners and shipping industry officials were, are, and will be interested in participating in it. It has a great atmosphere as people from 80 nationalities from all over the world come together every two years to discuss co-operation in the maritime sector," Yildirim said.
