04/04/2008
By Jonilda Koci and Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 04/04/08
Two Western Balkan nations have received NATO membership invitations at the Alliance's summit in Bucharest, while a third saw its bid put on ice because of a dispute with Greece. 
 Leaders of Albania, Croatia and Macedonia all arrived at the summit with high hopes. The three countries, signatories to a co-operation agreement known as the Adriatic Charter, had all been told they had fulfilled the criteria for entry. 
Greece, however, warned it would use its veto power to block an invitation to Macedonia unless their longstanding name dispute was resolved. Last-ditch negotiations could not yield a solution, and the delegation from Skopje left the summit Thursday after failing to receive an invitation. 
 "It is necessary to be with our people. This is a difficult time for a small nation," Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki told reporters as he confirmed the delegation would be going home. 
For Albania and Croatia, however, the story at Bucharest 2008 has been quite different. "This is a miracle," Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha said. "With your decision you have placed great confidence in us. I would like to take a solemn oath before you today that we value this trust, above all, as a great responsibility of my nation." 
Albanian President Bamir Topi described it as one of the most important acts in the history of his country and vowed to help other hopefuls in the region. "Albania will support the integration of the Republic of Kosovo, and will also be willing to offer its individual contributions within the politics of NATO and the EU for the integration of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia," he said. 
Opposition leader Edi Rama shared in the euphoria. "The invitation to join NATO is a sign of a new day for Albania," he said at a press conference. While membership represents "a success for Albanian citizens, at the same time it brings a new burden of responsibility for Albanian politics," he added. 
Celebrations began in the streets of Tirana minutes after NATO formally invited Albania to join. NATO and Albanian flags went up alongside each other in front of state institutions and parliament. Columns of cars with people hanging out the windows and waving NATO and Albanian flags circled the capital, while an official street party is also scheduled. 
Meanwhile, leaders of the other Adriatic Charter country offered membership, Croatia, hailed the decision as a stamp of approval on reform efforts. 
"This invitation represents the accomplishment of one of the two most important strategic goals of Croatian foreign policy," Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said. The other goal is EU membership. 
NATO has unprecedented importance in achieving peace and security, said Sanader, whose administration has at times had to work hard to shore up public support for joining the Alliance. "Our path to NATO was not easy but our experience shows that the efforts are worth it." 
 "This invitation is a clear signal for the whole region," Sanader said. "Membership in NATO represents the crown of one generation's efforts to bring back Croatia to the western democratic family." 
Croatian President Stipe Mesic said he considers the invitation a symbol of work that has been done well. "We want to be an active member of the democratic world. We will be a responsible NATO member that will contribute to the Alliance," he said. 
US President George W. Bush, who traveled to Zagreb from the summit in Bucharest, has praised Croatia for the reforms it has made and welcomed the Alliance's decision to offer Croatia membership. 
