04/02/2010
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 04/02/10
Greek President Karolos Papoulias won easy re-election to the country's mostly ceremonial "highest office" on Wednesday (February 3rd) by an overwhelming majority of parliament. The affable 80-year-old will be will sworn in on March 12th. 
The election was overshadowed in a week that saw the government unveiling specific measures to tackle a double-digit budget deficit and huge public debt. 
Papoulias won a second five-year term. The constitution mandates a two-term limit for the president, a position designed to find the high road above partisan politics. The president cannot block legislation tabled by the government and ratified by parliament, but only request "consultation" with the ruling party before a bill or decree becomes law. 
In all, 266 deputies from the ruling socialist PASOK party, along with the conservative main opposition and a smaller right-of-centre party backed Papoulias' re-election. A negligible 32 deputies from two parties on the left and far left merely declared "present", although they did not vote against. Two deputies were absent. 
Papoulias, a foreign minister in previous PASOK governments until 1996, is a native of the lakeside city of Ioannina, in the northwest province of Epirus. 
Veteran Ioannina-based journalist Giorgos Kyroussis told Southeast European Times on Thursday that during Papoulias' tenure as foreign minister he used to fly directly home to Ioannina after important work overseas to brief local reporters. The curious habit was a way to showcase the importance of provincial media outlets. 
"He is very in touch with the common person; every time he visits the lake he stops by to talk to the fishermen, many of whom he's known since childhood," added Kyroussis. 
The journalist said the people of Ioannina and Epirus believe that Papoulias elevated the office of president, "raising the standard even higher ... through his overall performance in representing the country abroad". 
