10/11/2006
(AFP, AP, Reuters, EUobserver, Deutsche Welle, Zaman - 09/11/06; EUROPA, EurActiv - 08/11/06)
The Turkish Parliament on Thursday (November 9th) adopted an EU-required law aimed at improving the property rights of the country's non-Muslim religious minorities. The "religious foundations law", which needs to be approved by President Ahmet Necdet Sezer to enter into force, will allow the mainly Greek, Armenian and Jewish foundations to regain properties confiscated by the state in 1974. 
The legislation, which sets an 18-month period for property claims, also envisions the creation of a special committee tasked with determining which properties are to be returned. 
However, the bill reportedly fails to address all types of confiscated properties. For example, it does not stipulate compensation for properties that have already been sold to third parties. The AFP reported Thursday that some of those affected have warned they could sue Turkey at the European Court of Human Rights. 
Under the legislation, foundations are allowed to operate abroad and receive foreign funds, provided that international activities fall within the scope of activities listed in their statutes. Some have criticised the inclusion of such a restriction, saying it would effectively leave out non-Muslim institutions. 
The bill was passed about two months after it was put on the parliament's agenda and a day after the release Wednesday of the European Commission's (EC) regular report on Turkey's EU accession progress. The paper criticised Ankara for making little or no progress in the implementation of reforms in a number of areas, including freedom of expression, religious freedom, women's and trade union rights. 
While freedom of worship was "generally respected" in Turkey, "non-Muslim religious communities have no access to legal personality and continue to face restricted property rights," the EC report said. "They encountered problems in the management of their foundations and in recovering property by judicial means." 
The paper urged Turkey to remove any restrictions barring the full operation of all religious communities by adopting framework legislation in line with the European Court of Human Rights case law. 
In September, Turkish lawmakers voted in favour of a motion extending the administrative rights to minority schools, but removed a provision that would have allowed them to enrol foreign students. According to reports, they were trying to avoid paving the way for the reopening of a Greek Orthodox seminary, something for which the EU has also been pushing. 
Under a 1971 law that put religious and military training under state control, the century-old Halki Theological School on Heybeliada Island off Istanbul stopped admitting new students, depriving the Eastern Orthodox Church of a key facility for the training of clergy. The seminary's last five students graduated in 1985, when the seminary closed its doors. 
The EC's report Wednesday warned Turkey that it could face a suspension of its accession talks unless it shows greater progress on human rights and opens its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot vessels and planes by mid- December. 
