03/01/2006
(BNR, Rompres - 01/01/06; Albanian President's Web site, Macedonian Government Web site, Politika - 31/12/05; ANA, Fena, HINA, TurkishPress.com - 30/12/05)
New Year's messages issued by the state and government leaders of Southeast European states emphasise the need for continued reforms on the way to Euro-Atlantic integration, as well as for further democratisation, strengthened security and economic development. 
Addressing the nation, Albanian President Alfred Moisiu pointed to the peaceful transition of power following last year's parliamentary elections as a major success, calling on political parties to ensure intensification of the democratic processes. Albania is looking ahead to a successful completion of Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) talks with the EU, Moisiu said. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina Prime Minister Adnan Terzic's message reiterated the hope for political agreement and implementation of key reforms, including changes to the constitution. 
"The road to Euro-Atlantic integration is our only ticket to a better future," Terzic stressed. 
Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov expressed the firm belief that 2006 would bring a successful and just resolution of the case of the Bulgarian nurses sentenced to death in Libya, as well as increased efforts to assist Libyan children infected with HIV. Parvanov also said that Sofia would remain committed to the fight against international terrorism. 
Croatia's President Stipe Mesic praised the launch of EU accession talks with his country, calling for further efforts to ensure progress in the new year, and particularly for elaboration of an integral economic development strategy by mid-2006. 
Greek President Karolos Papoulias said he looks forward to improved living standards for all citizens in 2006. He also said he expects an improved situation for immigrants. 
Macedonia's Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski, whose country was granted EU candidate status late last year, urged intensified work by all institutions in 2006. Either reforms speed up or Macedonia will miss its historic chance, Buckovski said. 
According to Romania's President Traian Basescu, this year will see enormous endeavours by Romanians -- both at home and abroad -- to restore "the country's place in Europe". 
Serbian President Boris Tadic stressed the need for sustaining the trust and support of citizens ahead of challenging developments facing Serbia in 2006. He highlighted the Kosovo status issue, the fate of the federal union and co-operation with The Hague tribunal as some of the major issues. 
Serbia-Montenegro President Svetoslav Marovic noted that the referendum for Montenegro's independence would probably take place in 2006, adding that he was sure that the outcome of the poll would not affect the good relations between Serbia and Montenegro. 
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said 2005 had been a fruitful year for the country, pointing to the start of membership negotiations with the EU as a key landmark. He cites judicial reform and fighting corruption and poverty as primary objectives for this year. 
