06/02/2008
By Valentina Pop and Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 06/02/08
The European Commission (EC) issued interim reports on progress in Bulgaria and Romania on Monday (February 4th), concluding that neither country has demonstrated sufficient progress in tackling corruption. For the EU, obtaining results in Romania and Bulgaria's justice systems is a matter of credibility when it comes to further enlargement. 
The report said Bulgaria made some progress in the area of judicial reform. However, according to EC spokesman Mark Gray, concern exists over "the lack of progress in high-level corruption and organised crime". He added, "Bulgaria needs to establish a better track record in the investigation, prosecution and judgment of those cases." 
While Romania was also criticised for failing to take strong enough measures to combat corruption, the situation is more nuanced. On one hand, there is a special investigative body within the prosecutor's office that -- according to the EC report -- "continues to demonstrate a good track record in investigating and prosecuting cases of high-level corruption". 
On the other hand, it said, the courts have not yet shown the same degree of professionalism and commitment to fight corruption. 
"The findings of the European Commission are not surprising for us," said the spokesperson for the Bulgarian mission to the EU, Betina Joteva. "We did not expect the interim report at this stage to be 100% positive." 
"Bulgaria is committed at the highest political level to strictly follow all requirements," she added, expressing hope that the final annual report, expected in July, will be more positive. 
 Romanian General-Prosecutor Codruta Kovesi said the EC highlighted the same issues the public ministry is addressing. Referring to the country's 570 vacant prosecutor positions, she was quoted by Mediafax as saying, "When I assumed the job, I said this is the main problem of the public ministry." 
"The report shows exactly the stage the institution [ANI] is in, namely that it doesn't function," National Integrity Agency (ANI) Vice President Catalin Macovei said in a statement. He also said he hopes ANI will have its first employees in March. 
Due to concern that Bulgaria and Romania were not entirely prepared when they joined the EU on January 1st 2007 -- especially when it came to corruption and organised crime -- a post-accession "co-operation and verification mechanism" was implemented to closely monitor the countries. 
Failing to meet the benchmarks of the mechanism related to the economy, the internal market, and justice reforms could trigger the so-called "safeguard clause" under which both criminal and civil judgments issued in Romania or Bulgaria would no longer be recognised in the EU. 
If no further progress is made before the next reports in July, the EC could recommend invoking this clause for one or for both countries. 
