21/04/2009
(FT, The Moscow Times, Mosnews - 21/04/09; AFP, Reuters, Deutsche Welle, Itar-Tass, Eurasianet - 20/04/09; AP, New York Times - 17/04/09)
Russia warned on Monday (April 20th) that it will not take part in an upcoming meeting with top NATO officials, unless the Alliance cancels impending three-week-long military exercises in Georgia. 
Moscow considers the drills, scheduled near Tbilisi from May 6th to June 1st, as "provocative", the Kremlin's envoy to NATO, Dmitry Rogozin, said. Russia will take "certain steps" if it sees no reaction to its complaint, he added. 
 "The meeting of the commanders of the general staffs of Russia and NATO, planned for May 7th, will not take place," Rogozin explained. 
 His warning followed a similar statement by Russian President Dmitry Medvedev last week, who accused NATO of "muscle-flexing". 
NATO spokesman James Appathurai said on Monday that Russia had not notified the Alliance about its threat of cancelling the May 7th meeting and that there are no plans to call off the exercises in Georgia. 
 "As far as NATO is concerned, nothing has changed," he said in Brussels. "Russia ... should recognise [the exercise] poses no threat to the stability in the region." 
The upcoming exercises were planned before the brief conflict between Russia and Georgia last August. 
 About 1,300 troops from 19 countries, including several non-Alliance members such as Armenia, Kazakhstan and the United Arab Emirates, will take part in the crisis response games near Tbilisi. 
The Alliance decided to resume formal contacts with Russia in early March. With planned meetings of the chiefs of staff on May 7th and a conference of defence ministers on May 19th.
Meanwhile, Russian defence expert and deputy editor of the online daily Yezhednevny Zhurnal Alexander Golts said Moscow, which vehemently opposes Georgia's NATO bid, is grandstanding. 
 "There is an obvious discrepancy between the mild nature and scope of the NATO training exercises and Russia's heated overreaction to them," he wrote in the Moscow Times on Tuesday. 
Noting that senior military officers from the region saw no reason for alarm, Golts suggested that it was NATO's preservation of ties with Georgia that sparked the new "round of histrionics" from Russian leaders. 
"This proves that Russia is only interested in turning NATO into a 'paper tiger' and not into a real partner," he concluded. 
Meanwhile, a Russian general announced on Monday his country's plans to boost its military presence in Central Asia, which it considers part of its traditional sphere of interest. 
"The Russian leadership plans to increase the number of individual warplanes at Kant," Nikolai Bordyuzha, head of the Russia-led Collective Security Treaty Organisation, told Kyrgyz lawmakers. 
The Kant base is near the US-operated Manas Airbase, which the Kyrgyz authorities decided earlier this year to shut down after Russia agreed to give their country more than 1.5 billion euros in loans and other assistance. 
