09/11/2006
By John Demopoulos for Southeast European Times in London -- 09/11/06
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis took the offensive last week over bilateral disputes with Skopje and Ankara, suggesting that Greece could block their accession bids if these are not resolved. 
 Karamanlis told parliamentarians on November 2nd that Turkey must take steps to avoid an impending "train crash" in its accession negotiations. The prime minister also said that the government could veto Macedonia's EU and NATO membership if bilateral disputes between the two countries go unresolved. 
"[Macedonia's] leaders should rise to the occasion and reciprocate the positive stance of the Greek government," said Karamanlis. "A commonly accepted appellation is needed on the road to NATO and the EU. It is a precondition for ratification by the Greek parliament." 
Athens and Skopje have long been involved in a diplomatic dispute over the former Yugoslav republic's name. Athens objects to its neighbour's use of the term Macedonia, which it considers to be fundamentally Greek, and has in the past blocked EU recognition of the country and imposed a yearlong embargo, starving the country of vital imports. 
Applauding the two countries' "otherwise good bilateral ties", the prime minister called for a full normalisation of relations "to ease the country's path towards the institutions of the West, and to strengthen regional stability". Greece has been among the foremost investors in Macedonia over the past ten years, pouring some $1.1 billion into the fledgling Balkan state. 
 According to Spyros Economides of the LSE's Hellenic Observatory, a Greek veto is in fact "highly unlikely", though the possibility of a mutually-acceptable solution looks equally distant. 
"You have to look at the internal politics in Skopje," Economides said. "The attitude is 'Why should we negotiate now, when everyone is calling us Macedonia?'" 
Addressing Turkey's accession bid, Karamanlis noted the "unacceptable anachronism" of the country's casus belli against the extension of Greek territorial waters to the UN-sanctioned 12 nautical miles. He also backed a strong EU line on Turkey's "explicit contractual obligation" to open its ports to Greek Cypriot vessels, a matter that also drew fire in the EC's latest monitoring report, released on Wednesday (November 8th). 
"[Turkey] cannot ignore its obligations to the member states of the EU, including the Republic of Cyprus," Karamanlis said. "It should respond to the conditions which have been set down and move along the lines that the EU has defined. There can be no make-believe. These are the only lines that can ensure a stable European course, the only lines that guarantee that there will be no train crash on the way to Europe. We do not want to see this happen. It is up to Ankara, however, to rule it out." 
Meanwhile, opposition leader George Papandreou continued to take a dim view of the current government's policy. He blasted the ruling New Democracy party for failing to react to EU murmurs of a 'special relationship' between the EU and Turkey -- something short of full membership. 
It was Papandreou's nominally socialist PASOK, then under former Prime Minister Costas Simitis, that first promoted Turkey's EU accession as a means to establish greater influence over Ankara. Now, according to Papandreou, Greece is losing one of its most basic tools for peace and co-operation in the region. 
 "Only when there is a real perspective for Turkey's accession will we have a powerful lever for the solution of the Cyprus problem and the creation of neighbourly conditions," he said. 
