10/03/2005
(Nine O'clock, BBC, Rompres, Ziua - 10/03/05; VOA, RFE/RL, The White House, Rompres - 09/03/05)
Romania is a strong US and NATO partner, US President George W. Bush said Wednesday (9 March) after talks at the White House with Romanian counterpart Traian Basescu. 
"I am impressed by your leadership. I am grateful for your friendship. Romania has been a steadfast ally of freedom," Bush said, with Basescu by his side. He hailed Romanian authorities and Basescu personally for their determination to fight corruption, noting the importance of this issue in boosting US investments in the Balkan country. 
"I told the president I'm most impressed by his campaign to rid the government of corruption in Romania -- a steadfast, strong commitment," the US president said. "He believes in transparency and rule of law, and that is very important for American companies looking for a place to invest." 
The purpose of Basescu's three-day official visit to Washington, his first since becoming president in December, is to discuss ways of strengthening political, military and economic co-operation. He is leading a delegation that includes foreign and defence ministers Mihai-Razvan Ungureanu and Teodor Atanasiu, National Bank of Romania Governor Mugur Isarescu, and other advisers and officials. 
"I am happy to pass our message regarding democracy, regarding freedom, regarding development of our strategic partnership," Basescu said. He also reportedly urged an easing of the US visa regime for Romanian citizens. 
His meeting with Bush was attended by US Vice President Richard Cheney, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, National Security Adviser Stephen Hadley and other officials. Issues discussed included security in the Black Sea region, the situation in Romania's eastern neighbour, Moldova, and the Middle East. Later Wednesday, Basescu met with US Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, who said he and other senators had voiced support for establishing a US military base at Romania's largest Black Sea port, Constanta. 
The Romanian president is also scheduled to with meet Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld. On Thursday, he will address the Council of Foreign Relations on the future of the Black Sea region. 
In talks with IMF head Rodrigo Rato on Wednesday, Basescu sought support for allowing Romania a budget deficit higher than the 0.4 per cent of GDP target envisioned as a precondition for a new agreement with Romania. After the meeting, he said IMF experts would analyse the government's letter of intent he delivered and would further discuss the issue during the next IMF mission's visit to Bucharest. 
