05/05/2009
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/05/09 
In order to get a 3 billion-euro loan from the IMF, Serbia's parliament approved a new budget on Wednesday (April 29th), drawing fire from thousands of workers in Belgrade. 
The new budget set revenue at 6.9 billion euros, and spending at 7.6 billion euros -- leaving a 700m-euro gap. The government hopes to fill the gap with international loans, including the one from the IMF, and debt modifications. 
It is also expected that 10% to 15% of the "missing" funding can be gained through cuts in state workers' wages and retirements, as well as from real estate, gas, cigarette, large vehicles and other luxury goods taxes. 
However, economists warn that the existing cuts will not suffice, and they say another budget rebalance will be necessary in three to six months, with an additional tax increase. For now, the government bowed to public pressure and gave up the announced wage tax hike. 
Analysts say it is too optimistic to expect a 2% registered drop in Serbia's GDP, as the IMF predicts. They say a more realistic drop of 5%, or even 10% should be expected. With such a GDP, the government will be unable to maintain the planned budget deficit of 2.3%. 
Central Bank Governor Radovan Jelasic says Serbia is now paying for years of delayed transition reforms, and that alternative measures have been discussed with the IMF. 
The first plan is to raise the VAT from 18% to 19% -- an action Finance Minister Diana Dragutinovic considers extreme. A higher VAT would raise prices and severely affect already struggling consumers. 
Dragutinovic also warns that the VAT, one of the government's biggest income sources, is not a magic wand. The first quarter of 2009 recorded a 10% drop of VAT revenue, due to lower imports. 
The budget rebalance also took serious aim at municipal treasuries. They will receive considerably less funding from the state budget. This state budget transfer makes up most of the local budget in poorly developed municipalities, with no alternative funds for other subsidies. 
Big investors' employment stimulation funds will also suffer. Companies used to receive 2,000 to 6,000 euros for every new employee. Now the stipend is maxed out at 4m euros, compared to the 27m euros spent in the last three years for employment stimulation. 
Unlike large economies -- like the United States or the EU countries -- Serbia cannot pump billions into financial or production sectors. There are no domestic reserves, and EU funds are still unavailable. 
At a time when the world's economies are in need of a stimulus, Serbia must save because its international and domestic debts are high. The government owes 600m euros to local and international companies for new roads, a figure not included in the new budget. 
With the shortage of international creditors, except the World Bank and the IMF, the government will seek funds from domestic banks. Negotiations over possible loan terms are under way. 
Not surprisingly, many in Serbia are not happy with the plan. Thousands of workers protested in Belgrade last week against the new budget, and the cuts that will seriously affect them. 
Union leader Ljubisav Orbovic told Reuters that middle-class and blue collar workers would bear the brunt of the government's anti-crisis plan. "The government will create a small number of profiteers and huge number of losers," he said. 
