05/08/2011
(EurActiv, Reuters, Bloomberg, Dow Jones Newswires - 05/08/11; FT, Reuters, AFP, Euobserver, EurActiv, BBC, Deutsche Welle, European Commission - 04/08/11)
Warning that the debt crisis in the Eurozone is spreading beyond its periphery, European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso called on Thursday (August 4th) for quick steps to ensure the financial stability of the 17-nation club. 
The measures to reinforce the area's ability to respond to turmoil, which the heads of state or government of the EU countries using the euro as their national currency agreed on about a fortnight ago are failing to calm the markets, he argued. 
"Developments in the sovereign bond markets of Italy, Spain and other euro area member states are a cause of deep concern," Barroso wrote in a letter to the leaders of the Eurozone countries on Wednesday, which the EC made public the following day. 
Stressing the need to convince markets that the appropriate steps are being taken to resolve the crisis, he called for a "rapid reassessment" of all aspects of the Eurozone's rescue fund. Known as the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), the fund currently has a maximum capacity of 440 billion euros. 
It is due to be replaced in the middle of 2013 by a new mechanism, the 750-billion-euro European Stability Mechanism (ESM), with a lending capacity of 500 billion euros. 
During an emergency summit on July 21st, the Eurozone leaders agreed on a new 109-billion-euro bailout for Greece. They also decided to take a set of other measures aimed at convincing markets that the 17-nation area can deal with the ongoing crisis, including to enhance the effectiveness of the EFSF, which has already bailed out Ireland and Portugal, and will run the new rescue package for Greece. 
Experts have warned, however, that the capacity of the rescue fund would need to be increased to at least double its current level to pre-empt attacks on bigger members, such as Italy and Spain, the area's third and fourth largest economies, respectively. 
The Centre for Economics and Business Research, a British-based think tank, said in a report on Thursday that Italy is likely to default, while Spain might just avoid it. 
Barroso said in his letter that the current developments "reflect a growing scepticism among investors about the systemic capacity of the euro area to respond to the evolving crisis" and that the measures agreed last month "are not having their intended effect on the markets". 
"Whatever the factors behind the lack of success, it is clear that we are no longer managing a crisis just in the euro-area periphery," he stressed. "Euro-area financial stability must be safeguarded, with all EU institutions playing their part with the full backing of euro area member states." 
Barroso's statement was not welcomed by Eurozone powerhouse Germany, where officials called the EC president's letter unwelcome and unnecessary, according to a report by The Irish Times on Friday. 
The paper quoted a German finance ministry spokesman as saying that, it "wasn’t clear how reopening the debate two weeks after the summit would calm the markets". 
EU Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn announced he was planning a press conference on Friday. 
Asked ahead of the event if there was need to increase the EFSF's capacity substantially, the commissioner said that to be effective, the fund "needs to be credible and respected by the markets," adding that it should therefore be subject to continuous assessment. 
