15/06/2009
By Aris Neroladas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 15/06/09
Since the disbanding of the November 17th terrorist group, Greek police have breathed easier. Formed during the 1967-1974 dictatorship in Greece, it was one of the last militant organisations still active in Europe, responsible for a series of attacks against Western diplomats and domestic politicians. The authorities finally broke it up in 2002, following a botched bombing attack on a ferry company. 
Although spinoff groups continued to operate, with one firing a rocket-propelled grenade at the US Embassy two years ago, revolutionary violence appeared to have run out of steam. Greece, it seemed, was ready to turn the page. 
That changed, though, on December 6th, 2008. The police shooting of an Athens teenager not only unleashed weeks of rioting and destruction, but appears to have revived a seemingly moribund tradition -- namely, urban guerrillas armed with manifestos and bombs. 
Several such organisations have emerged in the months since 15-year-old Alexandros Grigoropoulos died during an altercation between youth gangs and police. A group calling itself Armed Revolutionary Struggle claimed responsibility for the June 5th bombing of a tax office. Meanwhile, the Coalition of Anarchists carried out attacks on three Athens banks, and Molotov cocktails were thrown at a police station in Patras. 
In May, a time bomb exploded outside the offices of an investment company, and a group dubbed Popular Will sent out a pamphlet saying it was responsible. It also claimed credit for a March bombing in central Athens. 
Prior to that, the Sect of Revolutionaries staged attacks against police and a TV broadcaster. 
 The groups appear eager to inherit the mantle of November 17th and, with it, a commitment to lethal violence. However, while November 17th hewed to a Marxist-Leninist programme, outlined by its leader Alexandros Giotopoulos, the new breed of terrorists appear to have no coherent ideology. Armed struggle, they seem to suggest, is an end in itself. 
The Sect of Revolutionaries left a manifesto at the grave of Grigoropoulos, warning that it planned a series of attacks against policemen, state officials and journalists. It also said only pure luck prevented any casualties in their February 3rd attack on the police precinct in Korydallos, a neighborhood in the western suburbs of Athens. 
In that attack, the group fired off a semi-automatic rifle and threw a grenade, which failed to detonate. The manifesto made it clear that the perpetrators have no qualms about taking lives. 
The second appearance of the group took place on February 17th, with an assault on offices of the TV station "Alter". One of Greece's top newspapers, Ta Nea, received a phone call from the group, saying it was now focusing on the mass media -- mainly reporters. 
A manifesto then appeared outside the house of Amalia Ginaki, one of three persons taken hostage by an escaped convict during a four hour stand-off in September 1998. The group accused the mass media of "tele-managing" the hostage crisis -- the first incident of its kind to be broadcast live on television in Greece -- and contributing to the kidnapper's later "assassination" by police. 
Not only media anchors, but cameramen and technicians were fair game for future terrorist attacks, the group warned. Police believe it may be linked to Revolutionary Struggle, the November 17th spinoff which carried out the 2007 US Embassy attack. Both organisations appear to share the same arsenal. 
Only a few years ago, Greece staged the Olympic Games to worldwide acclaim, sparing no expense in a bid to demonstrate that the security problems of the past had been overcome. 
Now these problems have re-emerged, fueled by deep societal divisions that came to a head with the Grigoropoulos killing. Market economy reforms, some mandated by the EU, threaten the country's long-standing welfare state, while immigration and social changes are anathema to many on the religious right. 
The centre-right government is calling for unity against violence. "What we need is the same social and political alliance that was created in order to fight [the November 17th] terrorist organisation and did not allow petty politics to cancel our mutual goal," Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis said in comments to the Imerisia newspaper. 
The leftist opposition, meanwhile, hopes voters will remember that it was in power when November 17th was brought to justice. It has been chiding the current government for what it says is an ineffective response. 
 "The issue of security is a national issue that requires a complete plan, that does not exist," said PASOK MP Michalis Chrissochoidis, who was public safety minister when the earlier terrorist group was busted. 
As they did frequently during the long career of November 17th, Greek police have again asked British police officials from Scotland Yard's anti-terrorist division to participate in a task force. 
The officer in charge and some of the team members had previously assisted during the probe of UK military attaché Brigadier General Stephen Saunders in 2000. Their work, however, has been held up: a mole has been leaking information to the press, undermining the operation and embarrassing the government. 
For those Greeks who recall the height of the November 17th era, when the terrorists routinely outwitted the slow-to-respond authorities, such shenanigans may be all too familiar. 
