22/10/2007
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 22/10/07
Bosnian Serb politicians, angry over measures announced by the country's top international envoy on Friday (October 19th), have warned they may resign from state institutions. 
 "We are very serious this time. I am ready to resign all my duties as a protest to this undemocratic behaviour," said Republika Srpska (RS) Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, who also heads the ruling Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD). 
 High Representative Miroslav Lajcak announced on Friday that he was changing the law on Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Council of Ministers, to strengthen the functionality of institutions. He also asked the BiH parliament to modify procedures in both of its chambers. 
The changes, which include modifying quorum rules so government sessions can be held as long as most members are present, could help end the long-standing practice of blocking decisions through non-attendance. 
 RS leaders argue that the move is unconstitutional and contrary to the Dayton Accords, because it allows decisions to be made by outvoting one of the three constituent peoples. 
On Sunday, the SNSD turned down Dodik's offer to step down. However, it said all party representatives in BiH institutions would resign if Lajcak does not revoke his decision within ten days. 
Resignations would be tendered by BiH presidency member Nebojsa Radmanovic, Prime Minister Nikola Spiric, all SNSD ministers and deputy ministers in the state-level government, as well as SNSD representatives in the parliamentary leadership, it said. SNSD deputies would stay on in the BiH parliament, but would boycott all votes. 
Lacjak's office denies that his moves are unconstitutional and said RS leaders had misinterpreted them. It called on RS politicians to reread them again carefully. 
 "It is about time for politicians to start doing their job and finish reforms for the welfare of BiH citizens, instead of hysterical reactions and misinterpreting decisions of the High Representative," the Office of the High Representative said. 
 Leading Bosniak and Croatian parties have welcomed the measures, saying they would help unblock the reform process. The United States and Britain also expressed support. 
 "The High Representative is authorised to deal with the situation in BiH. The United States provides him full support. We expect all sides to respect and take into consideration decisions made by the High Representative, and to fulfil obligations from the Dayton Peace Accord," the US Embassy announced. 
According to British Ambassador Mathew Rycroft, the High Representative is the ultimate authority in interpreting the Dayton Peace Accord. "It is not wise to provoke the international community or to make threats," he said. 
However, Russia's Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir Titov said on Monday that Lajcak's measures could increase tension in BiH. He said the so-called Bonn Powers should not be used to further complicate the situation in the country, but to encourage collaboration between the entities and gradually transfer responsibilities to local authorities. 
The international community already has decided that the OHR would be transformed into an EU mission after its mandate expires in the summer of 2008, Titov said. Therefore, he argued, to return to regular use of the Bonn Powers would mark a step backwards in the country's development. 
Titov said the issue certainly would be raised at the next meeting of the Peace Implementation Council's Steering Board, scheduled for October 30th and 31st in Sarajevo. 
 In Serbia, meanwhile, a spokesman for the ruling Democratic Party of Serbia accused Lajcak of trying to eliminate RS, and of doing so at a delicate time when Kosovo status talks are under way. 
According to the spokesman, Branislav Rostivojevic, Lajcak is emulating former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari, the architect of a "supervised independence" plan for Kosovo's future. 
