19/12/2008
(AFP, Reuters - 19/12/08; AFP, Euobserver, EurActiv, Xinhua, HINA, Makfax - 18/12/08; AP, BBC, Reuters - 17/12/08)
Croatia criticised Slovenia on Thursday (December 18th) for blocking its EU accession talks over the two countries' long-running border dispute but voiced hope that Ljubljana would reconsider its decision. 
"We expect Slovenia to change its decision," Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said on the eve of an intergovernmental conference in Brussels on Friday, which Zagreb hoped would mark the opening of ten new negotiating chapters and the closing of five. 
Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor confirmed late Thursday, however, that his country would "give its consent [only] to open one chapter and close three," citing Ljubljana's "substantial reservations" concerning the rest of the chapters in question. 
Slovenia argues that documents Croatia has submitted to Brussels, including maps of their disputed common sea and land boundaries, could prejudge a settlement to their border dispute. It has also urged its neighbour to avoid using such documents in any future international arbitration or negotiations on the thorny issue. 
Sanader described that requirement as "unacceptable" Thursday. 
Croatia began its membership talks with Brussels in October 2005 and hopes to wrap up the process by the end of next year, so it can join the bloc as its 28th member by 2011. 
 It has so far opened 21 of the compulsory 35 negotiating chapters, or policy areas, that candidate countries must successfully negotiate to enter the Union, with four provisionally closed. 
Sanader vowed that this new hurdle on his country's path towards membership "will not slow down our reforms and our efforts to finish the job in order to conclude the talks by the end of 2009". 
Voicing regret over the development, European Commission (EC) spokeswoman Krisztina Nagy said France, which currently holds the rotating EU presidency, had invested "substantial efforts to find a solution to problems raised by Slovenia". 
The EC insists that bilateral issues, such as the border dispute between Croatia and Slovenia, cannot become part of the accession talks and must be resolved bilaterally. 
 "We encourage Slovenia and Croatia to solve the open border issue in the spirit of good neighbourly relations," said Nagy. "We now have a considerable number of chapters that are technically finalised but cannot be processed by the accession conference." 
 Pahor said on Thursday that his country is ready to open talks, aimed at settling the border dispute with Croatia. 
"I'm prepared to meet with Sanader as soon as next week," Pahor said. 
