10/08/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 10/08/05
Milan Lukic, indicted by the UN war crimes tribunal for murdering scores of non-Serb civilians, appeared before a judge in Buenos Aires on Tuesday (9 August), one day after his arrest by Argentinean police. He declared that he would not contest his extradition to The Hague. 
Under a November 2000 indictment by the tribunal, Lukic stands charged -- along with his cousin Sredoje Lukic and Mitar Vasiljevic -- with torturing, terrorising and killing as many as 150 people in the area of Visegrad, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). In May 1992, Lukic and his associates allegedly launched a series of violent attacks targeting non-Serb civilians, including women, children, the elderly, and workers on their way to their jobs. 
According to the indictment, Milan Lukic, Vasiljevic and other individuals killed five Bosnian Muslims on the banks of the Drina River on 7 June 1992. Three days later, Lukic allegedly participated in the murder of seven employees of the Visegrad-based furniture factory Varda. 
 On 14 June 1992, Milan Lukic, Sredoje Lukic and Mitar Vasiljevic allegedly caused the death of around 70 people in the village of Bikavac. The victims were forced to enter a house that was then set on fire. Only one person escaped. 
Just last month, the Belgrade District court sentenced Lukic in absentia to 20 years in prison for the 1992 kidnapping and killing 16 Muslims from the village of Sjeverin, Serbia. Co-defendants Oliver Krsmanovic and Dragutin Dragicevic were also sentenced to 20 years, while Djordje Sevic received a 15-year sentence. 
 Lukic was born in Foca, southeastern BiH in 1967. Until 1985 he lived in the village of Ruiste, in the Visegrad municipality, and then in the Serbian town of Obrenovac until 1992. 
He returned to Visegrad in 1992 as a member of the Serbian paramilitary unit Beli Orlovi (White Eagles), which systematically expelled Muslims from the area. 
The head of Serbia-Montenegro's National Council for Co-operation with the UN tribunal, Rasim Ljajic, says Lukic's arrest in Argentina was the result of "intensive operations carried out by Serbian security services over the past nine months". He added that the defendant would probably be extradited directly to the tribunal. So far it has not been revealed how Lukic had arrived in Argentina or where he has been hiding. 
His arrest leaves another eight indictees that Serbia and Republika Srpska (RS) must hand over to the Hague-based tribunal, chief among them Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic. Serbian and RS authorities claim no knowledge of Karadzic and Mladic's whereabouts, adding that some indictees are hiding in Russia. 
