22/02/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times – 22/02/07
The final round of Kosovo talks began in a conciliatory mood, but the Albanian and Serb negotiators remain far apart, according to Martti Ahtisaari, UN special envoy. "We are still facing the same situation" as in previous rounds, he said. 
The negotiating teams from Belgrade and Pristina started consultations Wednesday (February 21st) in Vienna on all aspects of the draft proposal for the Kosovo status settlement, unveiled earlier this month. 
"My position on the status issue hasn't changed and nothing has indicated that the position of the negotiating parties would be changed either," Ahtisaari added. 
He also stressed the efforts made in his proposal to accommodate the needs and concerns of Kosovo Serbs and other minorities in the province. The plan "is considerably catering to the non-Albanian communities and their lives in Kosovo after the status is defined", he said. 
The head of the Kosovo delegation, Veton Surroi, said the differences between the two sides are sharp. 
"Our position was to respect the initial proposal package and then discuss in which areas it should be amended. Belgrade, however, asked for a new package altogether," Surroi said, adding that there is little chance of reaching an agreement. 
Belgrade team co-ordinator Slobodan Samardzic had a different take on it. "We've discussed Ahtisaari's document page by page, but it was difficult to engage the Albanian side in dialogue over the status issue," B92 radio quoted him as saying. "We have been offered a document that contains legal formulations for a final plan, and we've responded by proposing amendments to the elements we oppose." 
Ahtisaari said his draft proposal reflects intensive negotiations held over the past 12 months. UNOSEK has held 15 rounds of direct talks between the negotiating parties and UNOSEK experts have visited Belgrade and Pristina 26 times. 
"My proposal tries to create a more sustainable society and create a better future for all, especially economically," he said. The parties, he added, have had a chance to express views on every article of the general principles of the document. 
The UN envoy said that, for the time being, it was impossible to determine how the negotiations would turn out. "We intend to spend two weeks in negotiations and then have a round-up meeting on March 10th," he said. 
