05/10/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/10/09
Last week's apparent poisoning of 123 Kosovo students, ages 14 to 16, has the public asking what happened. The cause of the mass outbreak remains a mystery, but symptoms included difficulty breathing, stomach issues and fainting. 
The teens, who attend two schools in the suburbs of Pristina, received medical attention at two different facilities on Thursday (October 1st). While most were treated and sent home, five students returned to hospital at the weekend. 
University Clinical Centre Executive Director Jusuf Ulaj told reporters that there was no need for panic and that officials are waiting for the final analysis to determine what caused the symptoms. 
 Erza Zogiani, a student at Hivzi Sylejmani high school, said she fainted when she entered the school yard, as did some of her friends. She told the daily Express they did not eat or drink anything at school, but noticed a funny smell in the air. 
The school is mixed: Albanian and Serb students are taught in the same building, but not at the same time. Serb children go in the morning and Albanian kids in the afternoon. 
Teacher Shkëndije Rrustemi told Express she saw several students faint. She said she also noticed the foreign smell. 
Kosovo Minister of Health Alush Gashi visited the teens in hospital. He and Education Minister Enver Hoxhaj appealed for public calm. 
The government has said it is closely following the situation at Hivzi Sylejmani high school and Selman Riza elementary school in Fushe Kosova. Officials appealed to the public to refrain from making hasty conclusions, which could spark confusion and panic. 
 "Competent bodies are investigating all the causes of these kids getting sick and the situation is completely under control," the government said in a statement released Thursday. 
Police are also investigating the case. News agency Kosovalive reports that police have increased "the level of vigilance, adding patrols near every school in Kosovo due to the mysterious poisoning of high school students of Fushe Kosova". 
University Clinical Centre spokesman Shpend Fazliu told Radio Free Europe that the bio-chemical analysis in a number of the cases came back normal. He said that toxicological reports will be sent abroad for analysis. 
