07/09/2006
(Nine o'Clock, The Korea Herald - 07/09/06; AP, UPI, Rompres, The Korea Times, Xinhua - 06/09/06; Jurnalul National -05/09/06; Wikipedia)
South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun, in Bucharest on Wednesday (6 September), said his country is eyeing an investment in Romania's Cernavoda nuclear power plant. 
"Cernavoda is one of the projects we are interested in," Romanian news agency Rompres quoted Roh as saying after a meeting with his Romanian counterpart, Traian Basescu. "I want to tell you that the Korean government will do its utmost for the Romanian people to reap advantages from this project." 
Located in the country's southeast, Cernavoda -- Romania's only nuclear power plant, accounts for up to 12 per cent of the country's electricity output. Canada's Atomic Energy of Canada Limited designed it in the 1980s. The plant's first, 705.6-megawatt CANDU reactor was completed in 1996. Unit 2 remains under construction and is expected to become operational early next year. 
When Units 3 and 4, which are currently in the planning stage, are completed and become operational, the plant will produce up to 40 per cent of Romania's total electricity output. 
South Korea's publicly owned Korea Hydro and Nuclear Power Corporation is among 13 companies the Romanian economic ministry has put on a list of potential contractors for the construction of Units 3 and 4, Basescu said. 
"At the same time, we see that Korea's large Doosan Group has acquired IMGB, a company that, apart from machines, has the capacity to produce the necessary equipment for nuclear reactors," he noted. "We are considering a serious involvement of Korean companies under the prospect of the construction of Cernavoda reactors 3 and 4." 
South Korean businessmen were the first major foreign investors in Romania in the first two years after the fall of the communist regime in December 1989. Just as Daewoo's investments in the Mangalia shipyard helped turn the country into a leader in naval constructions, South Korean investments could have a similar impact in other spheres of the economy, Basescu said. 
In 2005, South Korean investment in Romania amounted to 188.4m euros, according to the AP. Romanian exports to Seoul reached nearly 53m euros last year, while imports stood at nearly 432m euros, with electrical machinery, gadgets and equipments accounting for the biggest share. 
Roh arrived on a three-day visit to Bucharest on Tuesday, the first South Korean president to visit Romania since the two countries established diplomatic relations in 1990. He was accompanied by a business delegation and by the first lady. 
Following their meeting at the Cotroceni Palace, Roh and Basescu signed a joint statement of friendship, partnership and co-operation, as well as protocols on investments and co-operation in the field of science, technological development and innovation, Rompres reported. During the talks, they also agreed to boost bilateral co-operation in the fields of culture and education. 
In Bucharest, Roh also held talks with Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu and parliamentary leaders, and attended a luncheon meeting of business leaders from South Korea and Romania. 
