10/02/2010
By Barış Yılmaz for Southeast European Times -- 10/02/10
Serbia has fully normalised diplomatic relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), announcing the decision Tuesday (February 9th) after the fifth round of trilateral talks initiated by Turkey last October. 
 "I can confirm … that Serbia did give official agreement to the ambassador to come to Belgrade and represent Bosnia and Herzegovina," Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said at a joint conference with his Bosnian and Turkish counterparts in Ankara on Tuesday. 
 "We've overcome the problems," said Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu. "Bosnia will soon assign an ambassador to Belgrade." 
Added Davutoglu: "We want to solve all disputes in the Balkans through diplomatic means and reach for regional prosperity and stability." 
 The breakthrough was another sign of Turkey's increasing influence throughout the Balkans. With Turkish prodding, Serbia's approval of a Bosnian ambassador ended three years of diplomatic problems between Serbia and its neighbour. 
The countries have diplomatic relations and maintain embassies in one another's capitals. But due to Serbian rejections of ambassadorial nominees, BiH has been represented in Belgrade at the level of charge d’affaires since 2007. 
Repairing this issue comes at an especially sensitive time. There is international concern about the stability of ethnically divided BiH. Bosnian Serb lawmakers have discussed plans to remove obstacles to a plebiscite, sparking fears of a deepening rift between the two entities, Republika Sprska and the Muslim-Croat Federation of BiH. 
Davutoğlu expressed hope that this positive step between Serbia and BiH would help strengthen peace and harmony -- however fragile -- inside BiH. 
"The territorial integrity of BiH is beyond debate," Davutoğlu said. 
 Serbia's Jeremic said his country respects the territorial integrity of each UN-member state. Problems, he said, should be solved through the BiH Constitution. 
Balkan expert Erhan Türbeder, speaking to the Southeast European Times, said Turkey "sees a need for confidence-building among the countries in the region and believes best solutions to the regional problems can come from [other] actors". 
Turkey, long a strong supporter of BiH, recently began building more contacts with the Republica Srpska. Despite strong disagreements on the independence of Kosovo, Turkey's relations with Serbia are also gaining strength. 
In the past 12 months, at least four Serbian ministers visited Turkey to discuss various projects, both in business and politics. Turkish President Abdullah Gül had a very successful visit to Serbia last year. Despite opposition by Serbian nationalists, ties between the two countries appear to be strengthening. 
Turkey has long declared support for the integration of all Balkan countries to NATO and the EU. 
