23/04/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 23/04/13
For three years, 15-year-old Sinan has been working in an auto shop in Istanbul's Maslak district, trading education and playing with friends for the greasy and potentially hazardous work of an auto mechanic. 
Recent migrants from Eastern Anatolia, his mother supports the family as a low-wage cleaner and his father with on-and-off work, making Sinan one of the family's main bread-winners. 
"I like helping my family make a living. I went to the school until the fifth grade, that's enough," he said. 
That all his friends dropped out of primary school provides some degree of normalcy to Sinan's view of life and work. 
"I am a grown up and should assume some responsibilities towards my family as a real man. It is a fact of life," Sinan told SETimes. 
Sinan is one of 893,000 children estimated to be working in Turkey, of which 292,000 are between the ages of 6 and 14, despite a legal working age of 15. 
By now, Sinan may have grown up, but some child laborers haven't been so lucky. Recently 13-year-old Ahmet Yildiz was killed in a machinery factory in the southern province of Adana, where he was working for 43 euros (100 TL) per week, well below the minimum wage. 
The Turkish Ministry of Labour and Social Security has improved efforts to fight child labour, such as a 2009 programme to financially support families with child workers to encourage them to send their children to school. 
However, this effort still faces many challenges because of the difficulty in tracking child labour. Many children go to school in the morning and work in the evening shining shoes, selling Kleenex, or working in shops carrying heavy loads. In 2012, only half of 6 to 17-year-olds and a third of 15 to 17-year-olds that were employed attended school. 
Hakan Acar, a child rights expert from Kocaeli University, said that with the change of Turkey's education system, extending compulsory education from 8 to 12 years but dividing it into three four-year stages, Turkey might become a "paradise for child laborers." 
"The new system gives children at 11 the opportunity to choose between an academic-track and vocational training schools. With the obligatory internships and atelier works, this system might rekindle child labour," Acar told SETimes. 
Acar said Turkey made good progress in the mid-1990s thanks to collaborative projects with the International Labor Organisation and signed many important conventions on preventing the worst forms of child labour. 
"However, now this issue is completely off the agenda because Turkey has not implemented necessary reforms and monitoring measures to resolve its structural problems," he added. 
There are 850 inspectors responsible for monitoring enterprises employing children. On the other hand, the ministry is preparing to create child labour monitoring units in five pilot cities, where the level of child labour is high. This year the strategy will focus on hard and dangerous labor, agricultural labour and street labour. 
"Although Turkey increases the number of labour inspectors, it is not enough. The easiest thing is to monitor the registered companies," Acar said, questioning how the state will monitor street workers and the informal labour sector. 
According to the 2012 Progress Report for Turkey, the European Commission called on Turkey to strengthen its administrative capacity in the field of child labour and "put in place an effective monitoring and inspection system covering the whole country." 
The problems surrounding child labour spread beyond Turkey's borders, enveloping the entire Balkans as poverty and low levels of enforcement leave children susceptible to low wages, exploitation and the opportunity to better their future through education. 
In Serbia, where the legal age to start working is 15, there are an estimated 40,000 child labourers, or 4 percent of the child population. 
According to a joint study conducted in 2006 by the Child Rights Centre and Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Policy, the main reason for child labour is poverty. 
The most common form of child labour is peddling goods in markets and street stands. Begging in public, hard physical work, and jobs linked to criminal activity are mostly connected to the Roma children living in Serbia. 
"What is really disturbing is that every 11th adult in Serbia and every 10th child in Serbia thinks it is acceptable for a child to work if the family is poor no matter how much that could affect their education," Dragan Vulevic, head of the Family Protection Department of the Ministry of Labour, Employment and Social Policy, told SETimes. 
Under Serbian laws, people who benefit from child sexual work, forced begging or under-age work are subject to fines and imprisonment. However, monitoring of the law is poor as labour inspectors rarely find underage children working on the spot. 
In Romania, according to the official statistics, which have not been updated since 2004, there are around 70,000 child labourers working in agriculture, collecting recyclable materials, working at garbage dumps, as well as sexual exploitation and other criminal activities. 
Children younger than 15 are considered child laborers in Romania. The country ratified in 2000 the ILO Convention 182 on the Worst Forms of Child Labour. For the past decade it has had a child labour monitoring system, which is applied by local authorities and partner organisations. The country also has a child labour unit under the national authority for the protection of child rights. 
However, developed legislation does not mean de facto implementation. In Romania, the state control over the child labour is not at a sufficient level, requiring the wider involvement of NGOs into the process as a main driving force, analysts said. 
Save the Children Romania, as one of the most influential social partners, has run a social reintegration and school recovery programme for economically exploited children since 2001. In 2012, more than 600 children and youths were supported in order to go back to school. 
The Child Phone Association has been conducting another project to register beggars in local communities. The project is called "Where beggary begins, the childhood ends." 
"We have started this project together with our partners because we are convinced we can bring the children where they belong; in school and not on the streets. In other words, each child deserves the chance to have a normal childhood," said Catalina Florea, executive manager of the Child Phone Association. 
As is the case with other Balkan countries, in Macedonia, children older than 15 are allowed to work with the permission of their parents. 
However, the country, as many others in the Balkans, does not pay sufficient attention to update its statistics to capture the real number of child labourers. 
"We work with the so-called street children, children who beg. The number of these children is 1,000, while 100 of them are registered in Skopje," Irena Velkoska from the Association on Protection of Children's Rights, told SETimes. 
She added that these children do not work according to the law in Macedonia, which is party to the ILO Convention on the Worst Forms of Child Labour. 
"Almost 99 percent of these children are Roma. I think that they are obliged to work from early age due to their social setting," she said. 
Correspondents Katica Djurovic in Belgrade, Gabriel Petrescu in Bucharest and Marina Stojanovska in Skopje contributed to this report. 
Do you accept child labour even when a family is poor? Share your thoughts in the comments section. 
