22/01/2009
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens – 22/01/09
Elected overwhelmingly to a second term two years ago, the government of Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis is currently struggling with major challenges that may threaten its survival. Corruption, domestic unrest, the global financial downturn and international quarrels have sidetracked the New Democracy-led administration, which had started off its second mandate with ambitious plans for economic reform. 
Struggling to reassert control, Karamanlis announced a cabinet reshuffle on January 8th. He kept only seven of his 16 original ministers, while firing unpopular Economy and Finance Minister George Alogoskoufis, who had carried out spending cuts and privatisations. 
The move came after weeks of turmoil and political disarray, beginning with the Vatopedi Monastery scandal last autumn. In that case, Merchant Marine Minister Giorgos Voulgarakis allegedly oversaw a questionable land swap -- costing taxpayers 100m euros -- between the government and the monastery. Allegations of improper conduct forced the resignations of Voulgarakis and of State Minister and government spokesman Theodoros Roussopoulos. 
December 6th set the tone for the rest of the month after a police officer shot dead 15-year-old Alexander Grigoropoulos in Athens. Many rioters, who ruled the streets for weeks in several cities, exploited the situation to vent other, pent-up grievances. Students occupied university buildings, while rioters looted or vandalised hundreds of shops, public buildings and cars. 
While passions seemed to subside during Christmas, they flared up on January 5th, when unknown gunmen shot three riot policemen in Exarchia, seriously injuring officer Diamantis Matzounis. The obscure organisation "Revolutionary Struggle" took responsibility for the attack, as well as for several other violent acts. 
The government is also struggling with challenges from abroad. The global economic crisis has not spared Greece. On January 19th, the EC predicted only 0.2% GDP growth for the country in 2009, compared to an average 4% growth rate in the five previous years. Last week Standard and Poor's reduced its bond rating; experts also expect its budget deficit to exceed the eurozone's target of 3% of GDP. 
In addition, Greece and Turkey have exchanged increasingly harsh words in an ongoing Aegean Sea airspace dispute. The most recent flare-up occurred on January 19th, when two Turkish warplanes flew a few kilometres from a Greek airliner, allegedly inside Greece's airspace. 
As a result of so many problems at once, the Karamanlis government is struggling to preserve its one-seat majority in the 300-member parliament rather than embark on extensive privatisation and other economic reforms it had envisioned. A January 8th poll found the opposition PASOK party leading New Democracy 38.5% to 32.5%. 
