12/02/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 12/02/07
Around 1,200 state-run primary health care clinics were privatised in Macedonia on January 1st. General practitioners, gynecologists, pediatricians, occupational medicine and school medicine physicians got their clinics and the equipment and devices on concession. 
The reform is intended to bring about better quality service by introducing competition. In other words, physicians are expected to take better care of their patients in order to keep them from switching to a different clinic. 
For the time being, however, privatisation has brought no changes to patients. Physicians charge the same fees as before, while the so-called health insurance "blue cards", exempting holders from the full cost of the service, are still valid. Only a percentage of the cost is chargeable. A part of the gross salary of every employee in the country is allotted for a single state-run fund, which is responsible for funding the entire health care system. 
One innovation is that any private physician now has to sign a contract with the State Health Fund in order to receive compensation for each patient. Primary care physicians can treat a maximum of 1,700 patients from each age group, for a monthly compensation of 0.7 euros per patient. 
According to the health ministry, the figure of 1,700 is in accordance with world standards. If the number of patients is 3,000, then the clinic must have two primary care physicians on staff to ensure an adequate level of care. 
Such regulations do not apply to all practitioners. Gynecologists, for example, have no restrictions when it comes to the number of patients, and the amount of compensation they receive is lower -- 0.3 euros per patient. This figure, practitioners say, is far too low. 
Statistics show there are about 600,000 women between the ages of 18 and 65 in Macedonia. Around 200 gynecological clinics in the primary health care system have been transformed. This means that a gynecologist will have 3,000 women patients at most, whereby the Health Fund will pay on average less than 1,000 euros to a gynecologist per month. 
 "We have been manipulated and humiliated with the proposed amount," says Dr. Emilija Trajkovska, president of the Gynecologists' Association, explaining that the compensation does not cover rents, nurses' salaries and material costs. 
The Health Ministry says there are simply no available funds, and that all possibilities for finding additional money have been exhausted. 
