21/03/2007
By Ahmet Gormez for Southeast European Times in Ankara – 21/03/07
Several Turkish NGOs in Kosovo gathered last month in Vushtrri to assess UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan to resolve the province's status. The group, expressing their disapproval with the blueprint, sent a letter to international missions and institutions in the province. 
The Ahtisaari plan provides a basis for supervised independence, and strives for a multiethnic and democratic Kosovo which demonstrates respect for human rights. They say these are the positive aspects, but add that the plan has some gaps. 
Kosovo Turks want the plan to secure education, language, cultural heritage and other rights for minority communities. The group says that according to the plan, ethnic Albanians and Serbs have a right to education in Albanian or Serbian, but other ethnic groups cannot get education in their mother tongue unless they are a majority in the place they live. If the plan does not change, Turks will only be able to get Turkish education in the Mamusa region. 
"According to the Ahtisaari plan, Serbian is one of the official languages in places where even one Serb is not living. But Turkish won't be so in places like Prizren, Pristina, Gilan, Mitrovica, Vushtrri, etc," the minority group says. 
Turks also want the right to receive an education at a Turkish university. 
"If the Ahtisaari plan stays as it is, we will not have a democratic, multiethnic Kosovo, but an Albanian-Serb bi-ethnic Kosovo, which gives little rights to minorities," the NGOs say. 
Some say the history of Turks in Kosovo dates back to the 14th century. The Turkish presence became visible in Kosovo after 1389, when the Turkish (Ottoman) and Serbian armies fought the battle of Kosovo, opening the way for the Ottoman conquest of the Balkans. After that, hundreds of thousands of Turks started living in the Balkans and Kosovo as well. 
Turkish had been one of the official languages of Kosovo for decades, but was removed by UNMIK in 2000. The Turks of Kosovo hope to have its status reinstated as the process of determining the province's future winds to a close. 
