26/04/2013
By Linda Karadaku and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 26/04/13 
Leaders in Pristina and Belgrade are urging Serbs living in northern Kosovo to accept the historic agreement that allows both countries to follow a path to the EU. 
"I call on the Kosovo Serbs to unite and carry out the agreement, because we cannot do without our people, nor can our people do without its state. I expect an agreement with the Serbs in northern Kosovo and for us to come out united, rather than divided," Aleksandar Vucic, Serbia deputy prime minister, said on Tuesday (April 23rd). 
Kosovo Foreign Minister Enver Hoxaj agreed. 
"The agreement implementation will not be easy; we're aware that we live in the Balkans, and that Serbia has not changed much in its position towards Kosovo, but the fact that Kosovo and Serbia signed a bilateral and state agreement is a change in the Serb policy towards Kosovo, it is an acceptance of the independent Kosovo state," Hoxhaj told SETimes. 
Hoxaj said Kosovo institutions including KFOR and EULEX will have to take a stand on implementing the agreement, particularly since Northern Kosovo leaders called for a referendum on the agreement and adopted a declaration to form an assembly of the autonomous province of Kosovo, which would implement the Serbian constitution. 
Zvecan Mayor Dragisa Milovic told the Serb media that Belgrade's negotiating team "delivered the decision for Kosovo Serbs, without asking them about it." 
Marko Jaksic, a northern Kosovo Serb leader, accused the Serb officials of treason and announced that the Serbs from northern Kosovo will attempt to prevent the implementation of the agreement through "protest rallies, roadblocks and by boycotting the local elections according to the Kosovo system." 
"We will try to move the resistance from northern Kosovo to Belgrade, because this treason is not in Kosovo, but in the capital of Serbia. We will wage the battle for bare survival more in Belgrade than in Kosovo, because the main danger to us does not come from Pristina or Brussels, but from Belgrade," Jaksic told Belgrade-based B92. 
Hajredin Kuci, Kosovo deputy prime minister, said that Pristina has a plan for the implementation of the agreement. Kosovo news agency Indeksonline quoted Kuci as saying that there will be dialogue on the co-ordination of the Kosovo plan with the plan from Serbia. 
According to Dragan Popovic, an analyst at the Belgrade Policy Centre, the Serbian government has a strong influence on political representatives in northern Kosovo. 
"A high number of Serbian security forces in that part of Kosovo are in touch with Kosovo north leaders, which should enable the agreement implementation. Still, we cannot exclude a possible scenario where Serbian leaders decide to act independently," Popovic told SETimes. 
"I expect that the implementation will be hard but realistic. I don't expect any serious violence," Popovic added. 
Mentor Vrajolli, a security analyst at the Kosovo Centre for Security Studies, said that the reaction of the local Serb leaders was to be expected, and that the proclamation of a regional local parliament in the north is without legal implications. 
"Most likely, it won't be supported by any decision-taking sides. However, it might create tension on the ground for a time," Vrajolli told SETimes. 
How should Belgrade and Pristina encourage Kosovo Serbs to accept the Brussels agreement? Let us know your opinions in the comments section.  
