23/05/2005
(BTA, Sofia News Agency, BNN, Athens News Agency, Kathimerini, MIA, Bulgarian President's Official Web Site - 21/05/05; BTA, Journal of Turkish Weekly, Turkish Press, Fena - 20/05/05)
Eight Southeast European (SEE) presidents pledged Saturday (21 May) to strengthen efforts for the preservation and promotion of the region's cultural heritage. 
Presidents Alfred Moisiu of Albania, Borislav Paravac of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Georgi Parvanov of Bulgaria, Stipe Mesic of Croatia, Karolos Papoulias of Greece, Branko Crvenkovski of Macedonia, Filip Vuijanovic of Montenegro and Ahmet Necdet Sezer of Turkey met in the city of Varna on Bulgaria's Black Sea coast on Friday for a two-day forum, dubbed "Cultural Corridors in Southeast Europe: Common Past and Shared Heritage". They were joined by the culture ministers of Romania and Serbia, as well as by UNESCO Director General Koichiro Matsuura and Council of Europe Secretary General Terry Davis. Officials representing the European Commission and the International Council on Monuments and Sites also attended the meeting, held at Parvanov's initiative. The summit was held under the aegis of Parvanov, Matsuura and Davis. 
The participants agreed that the Balkan region has been a crossroads between civilisations and religions for millennia, and that cultural routes are a resource for economic development as well as an opportunity for changing the region's image. 
"Cultural heritage has been for years an alibi for confrontational action, but now we are proving that culture is part of the multifaceted positive image of the region," Parvanov said, in reference to the ethnic and cultural diversity of the Balkans and their troubled past. 
At the end of the meeting, the presidents adopted a declaration stating that "cultural and historical heritage can no longer divide us; on the contrary it will unite us and will be one of the most serious arguments for the integration of the region in the EU." 
 Of the participating states, only Greece is an EU member. Bulgaria and Romania are scheduled to join the 25-nation bloc in January 2007. The Varna declaration also contains the Balkan leaders' pledge to support the establishment of a regional framework for institutional co-operation in the area of cultural heritage. They also vowed to work in partnership with Luxembourg's European Institute of Cultural Routes and other specialised institutions. 
The preservation, promotion and interpretation of cultural heritage should foster mutual understanding and respect, the document said. 
The heads of state agreed to facilitate the establishment of a regional network of national and international experts whose task would be to develop a strategy for the preservation, sustainable use and promotion of cultural corridors, as well as an action plan for its implementation. The documents would likely be presented during the regional presidents' next meeting, which -- as proposed by Mesic -- will be held in Croatia in 2006 and will focus on science. 
Under the Varna declaration, the presidents also vowed to encourage urgent measures to protect endangered cultural heritage in the region, including further actions against the illegal trafficking of artefacts. 
