06/02/2009
(AFP, Reuters, AKI, Euobserver, Beta, B92, New Kosova Report, European Parliament - 05/02/09)
The European Parliament (EP) adopted a resolution Thursday (February 5th) calling for all EU nations to recognise Kosovo. Kosovo declared independence from Serbia on February 17th 2008 and has since won recognition as a sovereign country by 54 states, including the United States and 22 of the EU's 27 member nations. 
The resolution, which passed Thursday in a 424-133 vote with 24 abstentions, recommended that Cyprus, Greece, Romania, Slovakia and Spain follow the other EU member states' example. The five holdouts fear encouraging separatist movements within their own territories. 
The EP stressed that the EU has committed to play a leading role in ensuring stability in the Balkans and has expressed its readiness "to assist the economic and political development of Kosovo by offering clear prospects for EU membership, as it has for the region as a whole". 
The non-binding document also welcomed the "successful deployment" of the EU justice and police mission in Kosovo (EULEX) in December. 
MEP's said they expected EULEX to abide by its mandate to promote the stable development of Kosovo and to guarantee the rule of law for all ethnic communities. 
They also called on the international community to show full support for EULEX and to assist it in assuming UNMIK's duties across the entire territory of Kosovo. 
The EC and member states should help the government overcome critical staff shortages and support the training of civil servants, as well as assist the authorities' efforts to improve the communications infrastructure, lawmakers said. 
Welcoming the improved security situation in Europe's newest state, they stressed "the vital need for a multi-ethnic police force" throughout Kosovo and urged its authorities to facilitate the reintegration of Kosovo Serb police officers who have yet to return. 
The document welcomed the decision to appoint a senior Kosovo Serb police officer as a member of the Kosovo Police Service, who will report directly to EULEX, as a first step towards ensuring adequate minority representation on the police force. 
The resolution further called for greater joint efforts on the part of the EU in encouraging ethnic Serbs to participate in the political, economic and social life of Kosovo. 
MEPs further called for resolving the legal status of stateless Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians living in Kosovo. 
The EP also praised the Serbian government's acceptance of the deployment of EULEX and readiness to co-operate with the mission, despite Belgrade's staunch opposition to Kosovo's secession. It encouraged Serbia "to continue to display this constructive attitude, which is consistent with the country's aspirations to join the EU". 
