23/01/2008
(Euobserver - 23/01/08; AFP, AP, Reuters, VOA, Itar-Tass, Balkan Insight, B92, New Kosova Report - 22/01/08)
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci is expected to stress the province's readiness to move forward with plans for a unilateral declaration of independence during two days of talks with senior EU and NATO officials, beginning Wednesday (January 23rd) in Brussels. 
 "I will present the position of the institutions and the people of Kosovo, that Kosovo is ready and united to become an independent and sovereign country," he told reporters as he headed to the Belgian capital Tuesday. 
Thaci is scheduled to meet with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer. Besides the status issue, the talks are also expected to focus on a 1,800-strong justice and police mission that the EU plans to send to the province to replace the current UN mission there. Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, is expected to join the talks with Thaci. 
"Everything will be clarified after the visit to Brussels," Reuters quoted the prime minister as saying Monday, after he and other Kosovo leaders discussed the next steps in their plans to declare independence from Serbia. "I believe we will soon announce the date, but everything will be co-ordinated with Washington and the EU." 
In remarks after Monday's meeting, both Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu and Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi appeared confident that a declaration of independence will be adopted before the end of February. 
"It is a matter of days," Sejdiu told reporters, referring to the document, which reportedly has already been drafted and sent to members of the Kosovo government and parliament. 
The declaration is expected to call on the international community to recognise Kosovo's independence, Russian news agency Itar-Tass reported on Tuesday, quoting Krasniqi. 
In Berlin during a meeting with the foreign ministers of Germany, Britain and France on Tuesday, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice urged European allies not to put off "tough decisions" on Kosovo. 
The United States and most of the EU member nations have signalled their readiness to make such a move, even without the UN Security Council's approval. The key 15-nation body remains split on the next steps in the process of determining Kosovo's final status. While Western nations back the quest of Kosovo's 90% ethnic Albanian majority for statehood, Russia supports Serbia, which insists on retaining some sovereignty over the province. It has threatened to block any UN decision that is not acceptable to Belgrade, which is offering Kosovo broad autonomy within Serbian borders. 
