27/11/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 27/11/06
The Albanian government on Monday (November 20th) launched a 40m-euro international tender for the construction of a new terminal and other projects at Durres, the country's largest port. Funding is being provided by the EBRD, the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the Albanian government. 
Work is expected to start at the beginning of next year, and to be completed by 2008. 
The new terminal would have an annual capacity of one million passengers. Meanwhile, two other terminals and the connecting infrastructure are being renovated, along with other improvements to port services -- including the implementation of tight security measures. 
"The terminal will create all the conditions for hundreds and thousands of Albanians and tourists to travel to Italy and other countries of Europe through the sea, and for those who enter Albania from the port. The terminal [provides] the needed perspective for the future," Prime Minister Sali Berisha said. 
According to official data, the port was used by 704,000 passengers during 2005, an increase of more than 21,000 passengers year-on-year. 
There are five ports in Albania open to international traffic: Durres, Vlora, Saranda, Shengjin and Himara -- with a total average of about 5 million tonnes of cargo annually. Of these, Durres handles roughly 90% of the country's international maritime trade tonnage, and 65% of the country's total export and import trade. 
The government is implementing a master plan for the development of the port -- aiming to improve capacity and efficiency. A Durres Industrial Park, planned for a location just outside of the city, is being promoted by the EBRD. The government also has invested state funds to modernise the ports of Vlora, Saranda and Shengjin. 
Situated at the western end of Pan-European Transport Corridor VIII, Durres has an essential role to play in the economic development of the country and the Western Balkan region, says EIB. 
It is also important for tourism. Durres is considered Albania's gateway -- not only for the arrival and departure of ships carrying goods, but also for passengers, as it is connected daily with ferries to the Italian ports of Bari and Brindisi. 
