21/06/2010
By Dejan Stankovich in Johannesburg and Port Elizabeth for Southeast European Times -- 21/06/10
Day Seven, June 14th
Day after the defeat. The Serbian press was mild towards our national team. Nobody wanted to put more pressure on them after their poor start. The situation was calmer than in the first week in South Africa. Players were more open to the press, probably they knew that at this point they don't need to fight any other battle except the one on the pitch.
Some fans were at their training session to support them. On the other side, we've gained momentum, doing our job much more quickly than before. The first few days are always the hardest.
We used our free time to go out, for the first time in South Africa. Up until now, we were mostly in a hotel, or in the bus, or at the one of press centres in two Johannesburg stadiums. We went to Sandton, the upscale part of the city.
First we saw Nelson Mandela Square. The big statue of the former South African president is at the entrance of a huge mall. Out front, we saw fans from Brazil, Honduras, Mexico, The Netherlands, even from Turkey -- though that country didn't qualify for the World Cup. Restaurants were filled with people.
Day Eight, June 15th
We all knew that in June it is winter in South Africa. We brought our jackets, sweaters, warmer clothes. But this ... nobody expected this. It was around zero degrees Celsius in the evening and strong wind made it much colder.
We had dinner in a restaurant owned by a Serb who has lived in South Africa for 11 years now. He said that he is very satisfied with life in Johannesburg -- even though he has been robbed once and carjacked twice!
I grew up in a war-torn country. We know what it means to be always on alert. Still, none of us have had problems in South Africa so far, only a few threatening looks. But we've heard about attacks on our colleagues from Spain, Portugal, China and also on the Greek football players. It's not pleasant. We're in South Africa with expensive equipment belonging to our companies. Some French media people came with personal armed security. We're on our own, so we have to be careful.
We found out something else. A couple of months ago you could exchange one euro for over 100 South African rands. During the World Cup, though, the euro sank to around 85 rands and even less when you factor in bank fees. The prices also went up.
Zoran Lakovic, the general secretary of our football association, told us that a night in a premium suite in Sandton's five star Michelangelo Hotel before the World Cup cost around 120 euros. During the World Cup, it went up to around 950 euros.
Nevertheless, life here remains comparatively inexpensive. You can have a complete meal for around 10 or 15 euros. Draught beer costs two or three euros. True, the official World Cup souvenirs are pricey, but that's the case anywhere. Plain T-shirts with the FIFA emblem cost around 20 euros. A miniature Zakumi -- official mascot of the tournament -- goes for at least 10 euros. And it's really small.
Day 10, June 17th
Off to Port Elizabeth. Serbia vs. Germany game. For us, the deciding one.
First impressions: Port Elizabeth, with more than a million people, looks much safer than Johannesburg or Pretoria. But racial segregation is still obvious. Most people, especially whites, are open about it. They don't try to hide it.
We missed the Serbian national team's press conference, which took place while we were still on the plane. Thanks to some colleagues who'd flown in early, we managed to cover it. After booking us for the later flight, our football association had moved the press conference to an hour and a half earlier. These are the usual problems journalists face, at least in Serbia.
At night, you can walk in Port Elizabeth. It's a luxury we didn't have in Johannesburg. We went to a part of the city with a lake and a casino in the middle and numerous restaurants around it. Germans were everywhere.
We asked local people for clubs to visit. There were two of them. One, they said, was for whites. The other was for blacks, but we were told it was safe. We went to the other. It was the first time that we had the chance to mingle with Africans who were not being paid to smile. But most of them smiled anyway. We had a nice time.
Day 11, June 18th
An historic victory for Serbia! The first against Germany after 37 years. And the first ever for an independent Serbia in the World Cup. We can't say that we played an exceptional game. This time, and I don't remember the last one, we were really lucky.
The Germans were a player down for almost an hour because Miroslav Klose got a red card. Later, they got a penalty kick, but our goalkeeper Vladimir Stojkovich saved it. Finally some good news for us. It's much easier to work when you write about positive things.
I was at FIFA World Cup in Germany four years ago and I've seen how awful it is to struggle through to the last game once you've already lost the chance to go to the second round. This time it's different. Tonight Serbia celebrates.
Day 13, June 20th
It's the Brazil vs Ivory Coast match, probably the most attractive game in the first stage of the tournament. And Soccer City still isn't full. There were 84,000 fans, but also around 5,000 empty seats. It's been a big problem for the hosts.
The Free State stadium in Bloemfontein was almost half empty during the Paraguay vs Slovakia game. This is not supposed to happen at the World Cup.
Brazil showed their skills and won 3-1 but the general impression was that they didn't demonstrate the kind of game that wins World Cups. So far, nobody has. According to many experts, the overall level of play has been below expectations. Maybe, people are saying, FIFA made a mistake with this new Jabulani ball.
