06/08/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times -- 06/08/2011
KFOR Commander Erhard Buhler mediated a deal between Pristina and Belgrade that will last until September 15th. At that time, EU-sponsored talks will resume on who will control Kosovo's north and its borders. 
Under the new interim agreement, the border will remain closed for Serbian commercial goods, while Kosovo will not send customs officers to the two border crossings. 
Twenty-eight Kosovo police of Serbian nationality will be deployed at the Brnjak crossing to be accompanied by three Kosovo Albanian policemen from Zubin Potok. Kosovo police will not be present at the Jarinje crossing. 
KFOR will have full control over the border control points and the secondary roads coming from Serbia. Together with the NATO peacekeepers, EULEX and the Kosovo police will control the train on the Belgrade-Pristina route to Zvecan. 
Every person and vehicle entering Kosovo via these crossings will undergo an ID and weapons check. 
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci called the agreement Kosovo's most important achievement since declaring independence in 2001. 
"Finally, Kosovo has taken control of its borders with the international community as a guarantee," Thaci said. 
The international community has shown its commitment to Kosovo's territorial integrity, and trade reciprocity with Serbia will be implemented on the entire border, he added. 
Serbian chief negotiator Borko Stefanovic took a different view, saying a unilateral effort by Pristina to impose its will in northern Kosovo had been thwarted. 
"The agreement is not ideal, as we talked in bad circumstances," he said "[But] our reaction has prevented Kosovo Prime Minister Thaci from putting into practice what was intended," the daily Zëri quoted him as saying. 
It remains unclear, however, whether local Serbs in the north will accept the agreement and remove the barricades. 
"We do not want to go contrary to the state [Serbia] because we do not have any other country, but we must pay attention to our people. The agreement is not precise, everyone can interpret it however they wish," northern Mitrovica municipality President Krstimir Pantic told SETimes. 
Kosovo Serbs are particularly concerned about whether they will still be able to obtain goods from Serbia. That has been one of their basic demands since the crisis started. 
"At the citizens' request, the councilors of the municipal assembly will decide the fate of the barricades," Zvecan Mayor Dragisa Milovic said. 
Stefanovic addressed the Serb community in Rudare, urging them to go along with the deal. 
"You must be harmonious and support your country which cannot do without you and you without it," he said. 
Trucks weighing up to 3.5 tonnes will be able to enter northern Kosovo freely, while heavier vehicles will require Red Cross certificates, Stefanovic told them. 
Analysts in Kosovo say the agreement will ease the crisis at the border until a long-term solution is reached in September. 
"The agreement's implementation will not close the northern political issue, but keeps it pending. Pristina may feel more comfortable because for a while, it escaped from the possibility of introducing the problem in the political negotiations with Belgrade under EU mediation," political commentator Fatlum Sadiku told SETimes. 
Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report. 
