08/11/2005
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 08/11/05
After spreading like fire throughout Eastern and Central Europe, housing credits linked to the Swiss franc are now being offered in Serbia. Earlier this year, the German-based HVB Bank announced that it would make available long-term mortgage loans with an annual effective interest rate of 4.75 per cent -- nearly half that of similar credits on the market. 
 Since then the bank's offices have been besieged by phone calls from interested consumers. The 25-year credits have caused a sensation, holding out the possibility of a home purchase for many who had considered it out of the question. 
But as favourable as the terms may seem, consumers may not be paying enough attention to the fine print, warns Serbia's central bank. The National Bank of Serbia (NBS) is warning the public about the possible hazards. 
"As the dinar exchange rate is determined vis-à-vis the euro, loans in the Swiss franks represent a higher level of risk, which is also evident in a lower interest rate," the NBS said in an official release. Because Serbs receive their salaries in dinars, loans linked to a foreign currency necessarily involve exchange rate risks, the central bank cautions. Rates can fluctuate, reducing or increasing borrower's obligations in real terms. 
 "The credits have very long terms, and the question is whether 20 years from now the franc will remain the same with respect to the euro," says NBS Governor Radovan Jelasic. 
Dejan Miljkovic, an economics professor at Belgrade University, agrees. "Don't take credits under such terms," he says. According to Miljkovic, the Swiss franc is expected to increase faster than the euro in the coming period, so it is banks -- rather than consumers -- who will reap the benefits. 
One of HVB's competitors has weighed in, describing the Swiss credits as "risky". 
"If people now commit half of their salary payments to Swiss francs, and the Swiss franc strengthens against the euro, because we normally express incomes in euros, half a monthly salary won't be enough to pay the interest. This then causes a number of serious problems because the bank will have to resort to foreclosures," B92 quoted Raiffeisen Bank spokesman Svetozar Sijacic as saying. 
Whatever the pros and cons, analysts say, HVB's move has the benefit of adding downward pressure on interest rates. Long term credits in Serbia currently cost 40 per cent less than what they cost only a year ago. Banks are finding it harder to continue justifying high rates, which they have defended in the past on the basis of Serbia's poor credit rating. Gradually, the market is starting to behave in line with market principles. 
 In addition to the commercial credits, state credits are also available through the Agency for Securing Housing Mortgages, which has agreements with a dozen commercial banks. 
