23/06/2008
By Manjola Hala for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 23/06/08
Efforts to dismantle Albania's stockpiles of obsolete munitions took a catastrophic turn on March 15th, when a series of explosions occurred as crews were clearing out a storage depot in Gerdec, near Tirana. The explosions lasted nearly 14 hours, resulted in 26 deaths, over 300 injuries, thousands of homeless and 16.6m euros worth of damage. 
 Investigations into the tragedy have focused on what caused the explosion and who is responsible. 
The final report of US experts, who assisted the Albanian team to investigate the causes of the accident, says that the demolition process was carried out in unsafe working conditions -- the factory was very small and inappropriate for demilitarization of ammunition. 
"According to estimates, the explosion was so strong that it could be compared to a nuclear explosion," said President Bamir Topi. 
Gerdec looks now like a construction site with houses being re-built and a number of tents for shelter. The exploded hill has started to show its first signs of life with sparse grass and plant regrowth. 
Alongside the few newly reconstructed houses there are many others being rebuilt with funds from the government or by Gerdec inhabitants themselves. 
 "Some of the families managed to rebuild their houses very soon after the tragedy," said Gerdec resident Agim, who is working on his house with his family and friends. "Relatives or children working abroad helped them financially. I personally borrowed the money needed for the reconstruction; I could not live anymore in a tent. As soon as I receive the financial compensation, I will repay it." 
 However, officials in the Vora municipality, the entity responsible for distributing compensation and other economic assistance to the damaged families, say that the funds for reconstruction have all be distributed. 
As of June 10th, the finance ministry had delivered 90% of the 13m euros allocated by the government, according to the ministry's press office. On June 12th, the Council of Ministers issued a final decision on compensation funds, adding an additional 7.5m euros for rebuilding the business sector and for the inhabitants of Manze and Marikaj, which were also damaged in the blasts. 
However, despite the compensation, most of those affected by the tragedy are upset with the government's dealing with the situation. At the beginning of June, people sheltered at the interior ministry employees' resort in Durres started protesting against the ministry's decision to relocate them to rental homes. 
Many families in the area have refused to relocate, despite the contamination. The UN group that visited Gerdec in late March estimated that the level of contamination near the exploded hill is high due to two missile radioactive elements. Still, many residents have set up tents near the hill, and refuse relocation. 
Accommodation is not the only problem that caused dissatisfaction among people damaged by Gerdec blast. In mid May, claims regarding unfair assessment of damaged buildings caused an investigation for possible bribery cases. After questioning the 15 working groups established for assessing public and private buildings, the state prosecution decided to start investigations of four individuals and their methods of assessing the damages. 
The former workers at the Gerdec army depot have gone on hunger strike. They accuse the government of not properly handling the situation, and are asking for financial compensation for the wounded and the families that suffered as a result of the blast. 
Five people have been arrested in connection with the blasts, and on Monday (June 16th), parliament lifted the immunity of former Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu based on the general prosecutor's allegation of abuse of power. Mediu resigned days after the explosion. 
The prosecution says that an investigation into the matter shows that Mediu's "actions and inactions" broke a series of laws and procedures on security standards. They say there were illegal orders appointing Gerdec as the place for the site of the munitions demolition, and other orders to the army to transport the munitions to Gerdec that could have been the result of bribery. 
Mediu denies any wrongdoing and did not comment on the parliament's decision. "As a defense minister I respected the law [and] considered disposing of excess ammunition a national priority," he told the parliamentary session. 
Topi has also relieved Army Chief of Staff Lieutenant General Luan Hoxha from duty. Presidential spokeswoman Mimoza Kociu said that the decision followed a recommendation from Prime Minister Sali Berisha. 
Seven other defense ministry officials and managers of the private company disposing of the ammunition have been arrested on charges of negligence. About 100,000 tons of excess ammunition, mostly Russian and Chinese artillery shells made in the 1960s or earlier, are stored in former army depots across Albania. The country has pledged to dispose of the ammunition by 2010, and is receiving assistance from the US, Canada and other NATO countries. 
 Southeast European Times correspondent Jonilda Koci contributed to this report.  
