09/09/2009
(World Bank, AFP, Bloomberg, BBC, Makfax - 09/09/09; Reuters, Wall Street Journal - 08/09/09)
Economic reforms implemented between June 2008 and May 2009 have helped Macedonia become the easiest place to do business in Southeast Europe (SEE), according to a new World Bank report, released on Wednesday (September 9th). 
The Bank's seventh annual Doing Business study named Macedonia as the third top reformer in the world during the survey period, after Rwanda and the Kyrgyz Republic. The other seven countries in the top ten were Belarus, the United Arab Emirates, Moldova, Colombia, Tajikistan, Egypt and Liberia. 
 "Globally, a record 131 of the 183 economies surveyed reformed business regulations between June 2008 and May 2009," the report published by the Bank and its private arm, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), said. 
Although severely hit by the global crisis, Central Asia and Eastern Europe, including all SEE countries except for Greece, led the world in making pro-business reforms for the sixth year in a row, the report noted. 
"Reforms continue to move eastward across the region," Svetlana Bagaudinova, one of the authors, said, naming Albania, Belarus, the Kyrgyz Republic and Macedonia as the countries that implemented reforms in several areas for the third consecutive year. "Inspired by their neighbours, Kazakhstan, Montenegro and Tajikistan have also picked up the pace of reform." 
The report ranks countries for ease of doing business on the basis of an analysis of the regulations that affect the life-cycle of small to medium-size domestic firms. There are ten indicators used in determining an economy's position on the global list. They include the time and cost to start and close a business, trading across borders, investor protections, registering property, construction permits, enforcing contracts, paying taxes, getting credit and employing workers. 
Macedonia, which implemented reforms in seven of those areas, was 32nd in this year's global rankings, up 37 places from last year. The reforms implemented during the survey period have translated, inter alia, into increased investor protections and a more flexible regime for hiring workers. 
Property registration has also become easier and the procedures for starting a business have been simplified significantly by the introduction of a one-stop shop. It now takes only four days before an entrepreneur can operate a business in Macedonia. 
Of the other SEE nations, Cyprus was ranked highest as 40th in the world, but eight places behind Macedonia. Bulgaria, which was the region's leader in ease of doing business last year, slipped one position to stand 44th this year. 
They are followed by Romania (55th), Montenegro (71st), Turkey (73rd), Albania (82nd), Serbia (88th), Croatia (103rd), Greece (109th) and Kosovo (113th). Placed 116th this year, Bosnia and Herzegovina was again ranked worst among the countries in the region. 
