15/08/2011
(WSJ, RTTNews, UPI, The Guardian, CNN, Sydney Morning Herald, Spiegel, The West Australian - 15/08/11; AFP, Telegraph, San Francisco Chronicle, Bloomberg, The New York Times - 14/11/08; VOA - 13/08/11)
The global economy has entered a "new danger zone," World Bank President Robert Zoellick warned in Sydney on Sunday (August 14th). 
Addressing members of the Asia Society at an annual dinner in Australia's largest city, he said the turbulence on the world financial markets this month has undermined investors' confidence. 
"What's happened in the past couple of weeks is there is a convergence of some events in Europe and the United States that has led many market participants to lose confidence in economic leadership of some of the key countries," Zoellick said. 
Stock and bond markets plunged into turmoil amid warnings that the debt crisis which has ravaged Greece, Portugal and Ireland is now spreading to two much larger Eurozone economies, Italy and Spain. Also stoking fears was the decision by Standard and Poor's to downgrade the credit rating of the United States from triple A to double A plus. 
France, the second largest economy among the 17 EU nations using the euro as their currency, was also the subject of rumours last week about its credit rating. 
"I think that those events combined with some of the other fragilities in the nature of the recovery has pushed us into a new danger zone. And I don't say those words lightly," Zoellick said. 
Speaking to reporters later on Sunday, the World Bank chief stressed the need for strong action to appease market players. 
"It would be important that the primary economic actors take steps both short and long term to restore confidence," he said, calling on European leaders to enact structural reforms aimed at increasing productivity, job creation and free trade. 
The Eurozone faces more serious problems than the United States, and decisions by governments and central banks often come "a day late", the World Bank chief said. 
If debt-laden countries, such as Greece and Portugal, are unable to show the prospects for growth, then the crisis in the Eurozone is likely to continue, Internet-based business wire service RTTNews quoted Zoellick as also noting. 
Meanwhile, billionaire philanthropist George Soros suggested over the weekend that both southern European countries should leave not only the eurozone, but the EU as well. 
"I think that the Greek problem has been sufficiently mishandled by the European authorities that this may well be the best solution," he told German magazine Spiegel in an interview, whose English translation was published on Monday. "Europe, the euro and the financial system could survive Greece leaving. It could survive Portugal leaving." 
According to the high-profile financial investor, the introduction of euro bonds is the only solution to the debt crisis that has hit the 17-nation club. 
"There is simply no alternative. If the euro were to break up, it would cause a banking crisis that would be totally outside the control of the financial authorities," Soros said. 
The resulting world situation could be "very reminiscent of the Great Depression in the 1930s, which was also caused by a banking crisis" gone out of control, he said. 
The warnings from Soros and Zoellick came ahead of emergency talks between the leaders of the two largest Eurozone economies, German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who are scheduled to meet on Tuesday. 
