22/01/2007
By Ahmet Gormez for Southeast European Times in Ankara – 22/01/07
A young member of an ultranationalist group has been arrested in connection with Friday's (January 19th) murder of a prominent ethnic Armenian journalist and editor. Ogun Samast, 17, was detained in Samsun while trying to escape to his hometown of Trabzon by bus. 
He is believed to be the gunman seen in footage from bank security cameras near the site where Hrant Dink, founder and the editor of the weekly bilingual Turkish-Armenian newspaper Agos, was slain on Friday. 
The alleged assassin's father was one of many who placed calls to a police hotline after the murder. Ahmet Samast contacted the authorities after he saw the security camera footage on TV and recognised his son. 
Friends of the suspect say he was unemployed, belonged to a conservative ultra nationalist group, and had ties to Yasin Hayal, the perpetrator in a bomb attack against a McDonald's restaurant two years ago. Judicial experts say he faces a maximum sentence of 16 years in prison, due to his juvenile status. 
Dink, 53, was an important member of Turkey's ethnic Armenian community and an outspoken journalist whose views were sharply criticised both by nationalist Turks and nationalist Armenians. While describing the World War I killings of Armenians as genocide, he opposed requiring Turkey to acknowledge such claims as a precondition for EU membership. 
Dink had to defend himself in court on charges of "insulting Turkishness", for which he received a six-month prison sentence in June 2006. Similar charges have been brought against numerous writers, journalists and scholars, including Nobel Prize laureate Orhan Pamuk, although Dink is the only one to have been convicted and sentenced. 
Following his assassination, several thousand people marched from the offices of Agos to Istanbul's Taksim Square, shouting slogans against fascism and holding up flags and photographs of Dink. Protesters sang the song Sari Gelin (Blonde Bride), which tells of a Turkish boy's love for an Armenian girl. "We are all Hrant, we are all Armenian," demonstrators shouted. 
Turkish leaders denounced the attack. "Once again, dark hands have chosen our country," said Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. "This bullet was fired at freedom of thought and democratic life." Condemnations also came from international officials, including EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. 
The international press freedom organisation Reporters Without Borders said it was deeply shocked. "The Turkish government must weigh the extreme gravity of this crime and ensure that a thorough investigation identifies those responsible as quickly as possible. This will be a key test for a country that hopes to join the EU," it said. 
