02/09/2009
By Marina Roganovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 02/09/09
This coming school year, American Serbia and Montenegro Youth Leadership Exchange (A-SMYLE) will encourage students to quit -- or avoid smoking in the first place -- and brainstorm about ways to make Montenegro a better place. "[The project is a] minor attempt to show Montenegrin youth that smoking is a serious problem in our society and that by not smoking they will preserve their health and spend their money more wisely," Ivan Vuksanovic, head of A-SMYLE, told SETimes. 
Elementary school students will compete to design the best anti-smoking poster, which will be distributed to every elementary school, high school and university campus in the country. The winner will be awarded books for the next school year. 
The last part of the anti-smoking campaign will be cleaning one of the most prestigious high schools in Podgorica, the Grammar School (Gymnasium), of cigarette butts. 
"We have big plans on how to change the community, but we must change one thing at a time, and less litter is always good," said Vuksanovic. 
A-SMYLE is also hosting an Idea Fair, where local high school students can think of ways to raise public awareness on environmental, human rights, public and personal health issues, and address other social problems. 
Participants will submit their project ideas via blog, and a jury will narrow the submissions to ten finalists. Winners will be awarded the funding needed to bring their ideas to fruition. 
"[The] main goal is to encourage young people to take action to improve the society they live in," said project manager Fedja Pavlovic. 
The group's agenda is not all work however. For the second year in a row, A-SMYLE Alumni will host a Halloween party for elementary school children in the capital. 
A-SMYLE, established in 2005, is a student exchange programme under the American Councils for International Education. The programme provides scholarships for high school students to spend an academic year in the United States, according to its website. When they return, students are expected to participate in leadership development activities, civic education, and community service. 
Funding is provided through the US State Department's Bureau for Educational and Cultural Affairs and the Support for East European Democracy Act, according to American Councils. 
"Montenegrin A-SMYLE alumni have been amazing this year. Such initiative, enthusiasm, and organisation are inspiring to see. The students are a model of what positive impact we can have on our society when we act to fix, instead of just talk about, the problems we see around us," said Skye Wallace, programme officer at American Councils. 
