30/01/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 30/01/06 
Macedonia, which became an official EU candidate in December, will be coming under increased pressure in the months ahead to demonstrate progress in a number of areas. One of these is tackling corruption. The country has adopted a legal framework for anticorruption efforts, but implementation is lagging behind, according to the Group of States Against Corruption (GRECO). 
GRECO, a Council of Europe body, has laid out a set of 14 recommendations, including a provision on additional training for the judiciary, the attorney's office and the police. GRECO also urges better control over the process of registering firms, in order to close loopholes that allow tax evasion. 
The Macedonian government has accepted the recommendations and set 30 April 2007 as a deadline for putting them into action. 
One key step has already been taken. On 4 January, Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski announced the launch of a "one stop shop" system for business registration. Besides simplifying the registration process and lowering costs, the new system also will establish a centralised database, replacing the current patchwork of databases drawn from varying sources. 
In another vital area -- ensuring public access to information -- progress has been mixed. After a considerable delay, a Law on Free Access to Information was adopted by parliament on 25 January, but it won't go into effect until September. NGOs have complained that the legislation lacks protections for whistleblowers, among other important measures. 
Access to information is vital to ensuring transparency in administration, say anticorruption experts. 
Macedonia has an Ombudsman's office that can aid citizens who face corrupt behaviour in public institutions, but the government should do more to raise public awareness of this mechanism, GRECO says. 
The panel also recommends providing regular training sessions for civil servants about corruption risks, preventive measures and reporting corruption. GRECO also calls for strengthening the powers of the Directorate for the Prevention of Money Laundering, a comparatively new institution. Among other things, the directorate should be given direct access to relevant intelligence files, GRECO says. 
