21/09/2006
(Reuters, AP, BBC, Bloomberg, FT, EuroNews, The Guardian, The Scotsman - 21/09/06; AP, USA Today, AKI - 20/09/06)
Turkish novelist Elif Shafak was acquitted Thursday (21 September), shortly after the trial against her opened in Istanbul. The country's best-selling female author was charged with "insulting Turkishness" over remarks made by a character in her latest novel on the mass killings of Armenians in the final years of the Ottoman Empire. 
The case relates to Shafak's book "Baba ve Pic" ("Father and Bastard"), which was published in March and whose English version is expected to come out later this year under the title "The Bastard of Istanbul". In one passage, an ethnic Armenian character says her family was killed by "Turkish butchers" and describes their deaths as "genocide". 
 A nationalist lawyers' group, headed by prosecutor Kemal Kerincsiz, filed charges against Shafak under Article 301 of the country's penal code, which makes it a criminal offence to "insult" the republic, parliament or other state institutions and envisions a prison sentence of up to three years. The group is said to be behind over 40 similar cases against Turkish intellectuals, including the country's most famous writer, Orhan Pamuk, and ethnic Armenian journalist Hrant Dink. 
"If Article 301 will be interpreted in this way nobody can write novels in Turkey anymore, no-one can make movies any more," the BBC quoted Shafak as saying. "The words of a character could be used as evidence against the author or the film director. I think it is extremely important to defend the autonomy of art, and of literature." 
Speaking at a press conference earlier this month, she said such cases were initiated by people who wanted the country to remain "an enclosed, isolated entity" and to stop the EU integration process. 
 Shortly after the trial opened Thursday, chief Judge Irfan Adil Uncu decided there was insufficient evidence to prosecute Shafak on the charges brought against her and the author was acquitted. 
Shafak, the author of seven novels and an assistant professor at the University of Arizona, was not present in court. She is still in hospital after giving birth to her first daughter on Saturday. 
While none of those charged under Article 301 have gone to jail -- Pamuk was acquitted in January, while Dink was given a suspended six-month prison sentence in May -- Turkey has been sharply criticised over the controversial legislation. Viewing the law as a major obstacle to freedom of speech and freedom of expression in the country, both the EU and international rights groups have called for its removal. 
The European Commission, which is due to publish its new report on Turkey's progress towards EU accession on 8 November, is following Shafak's case and will report on the issue of freedom of expression in its upcoming assessment, spokeswoman Krisztina Nagy told the Bloomberg news agency on Wednesday. 
