27/06/2011
By Aaron Stein for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 27/06/11
At first, Turkey welcomed the Arab Spring with open arms. As street protests in Tunisia led to the departure of longtime leader, Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, the message coming from Ankara was squarely on the side of change. 
But as the revolutions spread to countries of greater geopolitical importance -- in particular, Libya and Syria -- the tone and tenor of the reaction has changed. 
 "Tunisia was a long way away, it had good relations, but it was nowhere near the centre of Turkey's foreign policy, so Ankara was happy to see this happen," William Hale, SOAS Emeritus professor, explained to SETimes. 
As revolution unfolded in Egypt, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan became the first international leader to call for former President Hosni Mubarak to step down -- a decision made easier by the fact that the ruling AKP's "relationship with Mubarak was icy", according to Middle East expert Dr. Elliot Hentov. 
However, Erdogan refused to do the same at the outset of the Libya uprising, even going as far as threatening to prevent NATO from intervening and imposing UN Security Council Resolution 1973. 
Having invested in the Libyan regime both economically and politically, Turkey was caught between its foreign policy rhetoric and international outrage over Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's vicious reprisals. 
 "Turkey was anxious initially to try and hold on to and keep up its links with Gaddafi, mainly for economic reasons, but eventually they had to change their tune on this one," according to Hale. 
Once the violence got out of hand, Turkey had no choice but to come out against the Libyan regime. According to Hentov, "Turkey is in no place to be the defender of tyranny. There is a sentiment in Turkish public opinion that you cannot side with tyranny, which has made it through to its foreign policy." 
 Neighbouring Syria poses what may be the toughest puzzle yet. Turkey has refrained from calling for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to step aside, only going so far as to urge the regime to implement reforms and transition to a multi-party democracy. 
Turkish President Abdullah Gul, in an interview with reporters, prodded al-Assad to transform "the system into a multi-party one", where "everything will be organised according to the Syrian people's will." 
Al-Assad, however, has shown himself in no mood to implement any real change. As he unleashes his army to quash the uprising, Ankara may find it has no choice but to take a stronger stance. If Syria starts to fray and mimic the trajectory of Libya, Turkey risks having a "pariah state, with which it had a love affair, right next door", Hentov notes. 
 Continuing turmoil in Syria could lead to more and more refugees streaming into Turkey, presenting a serious security problem. 
"The deaths and the refuges have forced [Ankara] to ramp up the rhetoric. Assad has shown himself to be all or nothing," Hentov says. "When it is all or nothing, Ankara will have to eventually side with nothing." 
But breaking ties witih the al-Assad regime brings its own risks, especially if the Syrian leader continues to cling to power. If Syria loses Turkish support, it has no regional allies except Iran that it can turn to for support. 
"If Assad hunkers down, where does he draw his strength from? It will not come from his regional neighbours," Hentov says. In general, Erdogan and his government have favoured regional stability, hoping to see reforms implemented gradually and without turbulence. 
Events, however, have rendered such an approach obsolete. 
 "Turkey is in a huge conundrum because their strategy relied on the permanence of the Arab regimes," Hentov says. The drive for political reforms demanded by the Arab protesters challenges the AKP's preference for top-down political reform, he adds. 
