17/02/2010
By Erol Izmirli and Catherine Gurgenidze for Southeast European Times -- 17/02/10 
The head of the Nabucco pipeline project is expressing confidence that it will be brought to completion, while other supporters are looking for ways to overcome obstacles that have held up progress so far 
Nabucco "will be implemented by all means", chief executive Reinhard Mitchek told the Turkish daily Hurriyet, saying he hoped this year would be a turning point. He cited recent talks with international financial institutions as well as negotiations with Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan and Iraq on pumping their gas through the planned pipeline. 
 Intended to ease Europe's dependence on Russian gas, the US- and EU-backed project has been stymied over finances and the need to find reliable suppliers. Backers have also worked to counter perceptions of a rivalry with Moscow-backed pipelines. 
 In January, Washington said it aimed at "depoliticising" energy strategy and even suggested that Russia could have a role in Nabucco. 
"[There] could be an opportunity for Russia to participate in the project, not as a controlling partner but as a participant," US Special Envoy for Eurasian Affairs Richard Morningstar said. "Given the present global financial situation, it might be the most rational way of moving forward." 
Turkey, a key Nabucco player, is also open to Moscow's signing on. "If the consortium cannot find the required amount of gas, it won't reject Gazprom's proposal to join the project as a supplier," Turkish foreign ministry deputy undersecretary Hakki Akil told the monthly magazine Energy Report. "This won't turn the Nabucco into Nabuccov. To have a share on the consortium is something different than joining the project as one of the suppliers." 
 However, the idea was officially rejected by Russian Ambassador to Turkey Vladimir Ivanovsky at a meeting held by the Turkish Centre for International and Strategic Analysis in Ankara on January 27th. 
Nabucco was proposed years ago as an alternative energy source for European countries. Currently, Gazprom controls all pipelines serving Europe from the east and supplies about 25% of the gas consumed by European countries. 
Nabucco's member countries -- Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania, Hungary and Austria -- signed an intergovernmental agreement in Ankara on July 13th 2009. According to the plan, the 3,300km pipeline will deliver natural gas to Europe from the rich gas fields of the Caspian basin and Central Asia, bypassing Russia and eliminating Ukraine's transit monopoly. 
The Nabucco consortium is headed by OMV, the Austrian oil and gas firm, together with four national energy corporations -- Botas of Turkey, Bulgargaz of Bulgaria, Transgaz of Romania, and MOL of Hungary, plus RWE, the German energy group. 
Finding reliable suppliers is one of the biggest hurdles for the pipeline, whose capacity is expected to be 31 bcm by 2020. 
Nabucco planners consider Azerbaijan the surest source, and the country's foreign minister, Araz Azimov, said in a January 29th interview that a "solution" is likely this year. Analysts, however, warn that political issues could impede as the country -- locked in bitter dispute with Armenia over Nagorno-Karabakh -- seeks greater leverage. Last year, Baku joined the Moscow-backed South Stream pipeline project. 
Washington also sees Turkmenistan as one of the main Nabucco suppliers, Morningstar indicated in January. But a number of obstacles stand in the way of its participation, including existing agreements with Russia, thorny relations with Azerbaijan and territorial quarrels regarding the Caspian Sea. 
Iraq, meanwhile, is a rich natural gas source, but internal disagreements make its contribution impossible for the time being. Iran, another gas-rich country, is out of the question unless political conditions change. 
Financing is another unsolved problem. 
The European Investment Bank last year confirmed its readiness to provide $2.25 billion for the project, amounting to 25% of the total cost. The project consortium is also planning to apply for loans from international financial institutions, said managing director Mitchek. 
Despite the hurdles, Nabucco planners expect to start construction next year. Nabucco Gas Pipeline International, responsible for building and managing the pipeline, insists it will start pumping gas to Europe by 2014. 
