17/05/2007
(AFP, BBC, FT, International Herald Tribune, CNA, European Commission - 16/05/07)
Cyprus and Malta cleared the biggest hurdle on their way to joining the eurozone on Wednesday (May 16th), when their membership applications got the European Commission (EC) and the European Central Bank's (ECB) approval. The move paves the way for their entry into the area on January 1st, 2008, as its 14th and 15th members. 
The recommendations made by the EC and ECB on the two countries' bids will first be discussed by the EU finance ministers at a meeting in early June and then by the 27-nation bloc's leaders during their two-day summit, opening on June 21st. The final decision on Cyprus and Malta's admission into the eurozone will be taken by the EU finance ministers on July 10th, when they are also to set the rate at which the Cypriot pound and the Maltese lira will be exchanged for the euro. 
The Convergence Reports issued by the EC and the ECB on Wednesday said the two countries fulfilled the membership criteria, including inflation rate, government finance, exchange rate and long-term interest rates. The Frankfurt-based central bank, however, noted the need for both Cyprus and Malta "to continue on a sustainable and credible path of fiscal consolidation and to improve (their) fiscal performance by tangibly reducing (their) high debt ratio," the AFP reported. 
Announcing the EC's decision at a press conference in Brussels on Wednesday, Joaquin Almunia, EU Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs, voiced confidence that it will be supported by the EU heads of state at the June summit. "There is no question about it, as far as I am concerned," he said. 
Welcoming the EC and ECB's approval of his country's bid, Cypriot Finance Minister Michalis Sarris pledged Wednesday that his ministry would work for the smooth introduction of the euro in Cyprus. 
"Cyprus has achieved a high degree of economic convergence with the euro area and is ready to adopt the euro in January 2008," an EC statement quoted Almunia as saying. "However, in order to ensure that euro adoption will be a truly successful story, Cyprus must continue to implement stability-oriented policies in order to safeguard its external competitiveness. In addition, Cyprus must also speed up and finalise the crucial practical preparations to ensure that the changeover takes place smoothly, as was the case in Slovenia at the beginning of this year." 
On January 1st, Slovenia became the first of the ten countries that joined the EU in May 2004, including Cyprus and Malta, to join the eurozone as its 13th member. 
Following the failure of UN-sponsored efforts to end Cyprus's more than 32-year division in April 2004, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the island joined the Union. 
Both the ECB and the EC cautioned Wednesday about the potential economic impact the eventual reunification of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities could have. Such a development, according to the bank, "could entail additional structural and fiscal challenges depending on the specific economic and fiscal arrangements". 
While refusing to speculate about the possible economic consequences of the island's reunification, Almunia warned against the unilateral adoption of the euro in its Turkish-run north, which is not officially recognised by the EU and will not join the eurozone on January 1st. 
