14/01/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 14/01/08
Holding its first session since the November 25th elections, parliament gave its approval Saturday (January 12th) to Prime Minister Ivo Sanader's new coalition government. Eighty-two deputies backed Sanader's cabinet, while 62 voted against it. 
"We are facing the period during which Croatia will achieve its strategic goals," Sanader told lawmakers. He said his priorities are economic growth, Croatia's entry into the EU and NATO, and implementation of reforms. 
The new government has 15 ministers -- two more than before -- and four deputy prime ministers. Most of the ministers in Sanader's previous cabinet are keeping their jobs. Indeed, the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) has all the portfolios except for two ministries and two deputy prime ministers. After more than a month of negotiations, Sanader has emerged in a comparatively strong position. 
Even so, the opposition Social Democrats (SDP) have bitterly criticised what they call the "obvious political trading for functions and chairs". 
For the first time, an ethnic Serb has been appointed deputy prime minister. He is Slobodan Uzelac of the Independent Serb Democratic Party (SDSS). Uzelac will be in charge of economic development, reconstruction and the return of refugees. 
Djurdja Adlesic, head of the Social Liberals, is among the other deputy prime ministers. The Social Liberals also received the tourism ministry, which will be headed by Damir Bajs. Bozidar Pankretic, of the Croatian Peasants' Party, will be the new agriculture minister. 
Former foreign minister, Kolinda Grabar Kitarovic, did not get a second term. She is being replaced by a rising star in the HDZ, Goran Jandrokovic. 
Analysts agree that Sanader will likely face a tougher second term. The opposition is stronger and more coherent than during his previous mandate. The new SDP leader, Zoran Milanovic, is young, fiery and eloquent. His party controls one-third of the votes in parliament. 
Milanovic responded immediately to the prime minister's opening address. He said the EU has already warned Croatia on several occasions that the country's reform process is not going smoothly enough, and that there are gaps -- especially in judicial reform and the fight against corruption -- that must be addressed. 
Sanader and his government are engaged in "wishful thinking", the SDP leader said. 
