31/03/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 31/03/11 
Despite the Serbian government's announcements that several of the world's biggest mobile phone operators would be vying for Telekom Srbija and that the state budget would gain at least 1.4 billion euros, the tender for the most profitable Serbian company is on the verge of failure. 
Although Telekom Austria, Deutsche Telekom, Turkcell, America Movil, Weather Investments and France Telecom all showed interest in the tender for 51% of the state-owned company, in the end the only bid was submitted by Telekom Austria -- for just 950m euros. 
Telecommunications Minister Predrag Markovic described the Austrians' offer as "indecent". The government announced on Tuesday (March 29th) that it will give Telekom Austria 15 days to increase its bid, after which a final decision on the outcome of the sale will be made. 
But many economic experts, unions and opposition parties are now calling for the sale to be abandoned. 
Telekom Srbija is the country's most successful state-owned company. In 2010, it posted a 130m-euro profit. The company boasts around 7.3 million mobile telephone subscribers and 3.35 million land telephone users. 
 It owns Telekom Srpske in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Mtel in Montenegro. The Serbian government controls 80% of the company's shares, while Greek OTE holds 20%. The tender sale of Telekom was called on October 20th, 2010. 
However, the announcement of the sale triggered a series of protests. The company unions were against the sale, fearing that the new owners would dismiss workers. The opposition Democratic Party of Serbia collected over 100,000 signatures against the tender. 
Economic experts warned that the telecom is an engine of the Serbian economy and that the new owners would not have to keep domestic firms as associates. The government's decision to give the Austrians more time has only added fuel to the fire. 
"The nearness of the election is the main reason why the government wants to sell Telekom for nothing. That way it seeks to fill up budget holes and use the money to launch the ruling parties' election campaign," Democratic Party of Serbia spokesman Petar Petkovic told SETimes, alluding to the 2012 general election. 
However last week, Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic denied claims that the budget would be in trouble without the telecom sale, saying that this inflow had not been planned for this year's budget. 
On the other hand, the government confirmed the intention to use the money for building infrastructure and repaying unfavourable foreign loans, but stressed that this was not reason enough to sell the company "below price". 
Economist Milan Kovacevic said the government is making a mistake by giving the Austrians another chance. "This is the completion of a clumsy attempt at the sale of the telecom. It is unusual to offer negotiations to the only company that has applied for a tender and failed to meet the basic conditions," Kovacevic told SETimes. 
One of the few to back the government's position was Vienna Institute for International Economic Studies associate Vladimir Gligorov, who said this is "the only natural decision". 
"The sale of the telecom seems inevitable, given the state of payment balance and public finance. When one sells out of need, one cannot expect a price much better than the one offered in a sale, but that should have been thought about when money was being spent and debts were being made," Gligorov told the Belgrade media. 
