12/11/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Time in Pristina -- 12/11/09
Just prior to Sunday's (November 15th) first independent elections in Kosovo, campaign violence hit the former Serbian province. 
Kosovo Police confirmed that a group of people threw rocks at Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's entourage Wednesday evening (November 11th), after a campaign rally in Decani. Several cars were damaged, but no injuries were reported 
Decani is controlled by Ramush Haradinaj's Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK). The daily Express reported that three suspects have been arrested. 
"Incited and organised directly from Ramush Haradinaj … there was an attempt to violate and frighten the free vote of the citizens," Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) said after the incident. 
The US Embassy in Pristina also condemned the attack. "Violence has no place in campaigns, elections or the democratic process. Allegations of violence by one party, in no way justify violent responses from others. We call on all political leaders, parties and activists to refrain from all violence and provocations." 
More than 1.5 million voters are registered to hit the polls in the first of two rounds of votes. The second will take place on December 13th. 
There are also 1,806 eligible voters abroad. Voting will take place in 36 municipalities -- with the exception of northern Mitrovica and Partesh, in the area of Gjilan. 
The winning candidates -- out of the more than 6,500 running for assembly positions and 205 running for mayoral posts -- must achieve 50% of the vote for a simple majority win. 
The European Network of Election Monitoring Organisations (ENEMO) led by Darko Aleksov, will observe the vote. The monitors "will ensure that an independent and competent assessment of the local elections can be made", Aleksov said. 
President Fatmir Sejdiu says these elections are a good chance to prove Kosovo "is ready to hold -- in the best way -- its first elections as a sovereign and democratic state". 
Late last month, Sejdiu, Thaci and US Ambassador to Kosovo Christopher Dell visited the Central Elections Commission. During the visit, Dell underscored the importance of Kosovo organising the elections itself. 
"No UNMIK. No OSCE. It's Kosovo running the show," he said. "Finally, and perhaps most importantly, all citizens of Kosovo have a responsibility to make these elections a success." 
Kosovo leaders and international representatives urge Kosovo Serbs to participate in the elections, but Belgrade continues to oppose it. 
"Serbs taking part would not be able to count on Belgrade's support," Serbian Minister for Kosovo Oliver Ivanovic told Belgrade-based B92."When only 3% of the population participates, that undermines legitimacy." 
"I am afraid that [Serb candidates] do not understand that by participating in the elections, they fall into a trap, because, this can bring all Serbs into a confrontation with the Serbian government," he added. 
But EU Special Representative Pieter Feith told local media "if the local Serbs do not participate in the local elections …. they could risk losing control of the local governments in municipalities and territories in which they make up the majority population." 
