31/01/2007
(Turkish Daily News, Sabah, NTV MSNBC - 31/01/07; AFP, DPA, Turkish Daily News, Zaman - 30/01/07; Reuters, AP, DPA, AKI - 29/01/07; Reuters - 26/01/07; AFP - 20/01/07; BBC - 09/12/06)
Suspected al-Qaeda militants arrested in Turkey this week were planning to stage bombings in major cities around the country, Turkish media reported on Tuesday (January 30th), citing preliminary investigation results. 
In a series of simultaneous raids Monday, Turkish Special Police arrested up to 50 individuals for suspected links to the al-Qaeda network. Among those currently in custody is the suspected leader of the terrorist group's operations in Turkey and the man responsible for its communications with cells located abroad. 
 This person, identified only as Ekrem K., reportedly had contact with Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader of the al-Qaeda terrorist network in Iraq, who was killed in an air raid by US-led Coalition forces last June. 
Citing the semi-official Anatolia news agency, the English-language Turkish Daily News (TDN) said on Wednesday that police are looking for another person, Haydar K, who is believed to have been in charge of contacts with al-Qaeda leaders in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
The same day, a report in the daily Sabah named Haydar Kirkal, 27, as al-Qaeda's representative in Turkey and as one of the ten top operatives of the group arrested in the central Anatolian province of Konya, where another 24 people were reportedly detained Monday. 
While there has been no official statement on the operation, Turkish media reported that at least 21 other people were arrested in the western provinces of Istanbul, Izmir and Kocaeli, and in the southeastern province of Mardin. Those detainees were later sent for questioning to Konya, private NTV television reported. According to some reports, arrests were also made in Bursa and Afyonkarahisar. 
Police sources said on Tuesday that they had seized documents, computers and CDs during raids on houses and other sites in Konya, including a madrasah, a sort of a religious school for children. A gun and documents were seized during the searches in Izmir. 
The crackdown on the suspected al-Qaeda militants was launched after about 18 months of surveillance. Some 600 police officers in five provinces reportedly were involved in the operation. 
The preliminary questioning of the suspects indicates that the group recruited people who fought in places such as Bosnia and Herzegovina and Afghanistan, rather than locals. Police sources also say that they communicated among themselves only via the internet, never using telephones for this. 
The Turkish authorities have carried out a number of operations targeting suspected Islamic militants since the four suicide bombings in Istanbul in November 2003, in which more than 60 people were killed. Some 73 people, including two Syrian nationals, are currently on trial for their alleged involvement in the attacks that targeted two synagogues, the British consulate and the headquarters of HSBC Bank in Turkey's largest city. 
While denying any direct links with the al-Qaeda network, many of those arrested for the 2003 bombings have admitted they had attended militant Islamist training camps in Chechnya and Afghanistan. 
On Friday, a Turkish court sentenced seven members of the Ansar al-Islam militant group to up to 12-and-half years in prison for their involvement in a plan to kill US President George W. Bush during the 2004 NATO summit in Istanbul. This radical Islamist group is also believed to have links to Osama bin Laden's terrorist network. 
In early December, police said they had arrested ten people with suspected links to al-Qaeda, during raids in Ankara, Istanbul and Izmir at the start of Pope Benedict XVI's visit to Turkey in late November. One of the detainees, a lawyer, described as al-Qaeda's leader in Turkey, was indicted in Izmir earlier this month, with the prosecutor demanding a 38-year prison sentence for him. During the search of his home, police allegedly found a CD coated with a special material that would cause it to explode when inserted into a computer. 
