19/08/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 19/08/10 
As Greece slowly moves back from the brink of bankruptcy, a debate is unfolding in Serbia on the extent to which the financial crisis inside the EU could affect Belgrade's Union membership. 
European Movement in Serbia Deputy President Tanja Miscevic warned that the Greek crisis could have a political and economic effect on further enlargement of the EU. 
A former head of the Serbian EU Integration Office, Miscevic said that Serbia must face the fact that the evaluation of EU candidate countries' progress has become "more serious, more specific and more direct", especially since Bulgaria and Romania joined the union in 2007. 
Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences Professor Pedrag Simic told the Belgrade media that because of the financial crisis, Germany in particular sees "Greece in each new candidate". 
However, current Serbian Government EU Integration Office Director Milica Delevic told SETimes that the EU has "a history of overcoming crisis". 
"The current challenge -- undoubtedly serious one -- means that there is less time, effort and solidarity that can be put into the enlargement process, but I don't think it can stop the process altogether," Delevic said. 
She says Serbia's citizens need to be aware that "the road to membership is more important than the end itself", and the country must make changes to achieve that goal. 
Serbia now needs to concentrate on making its reforms successful, according to Delevic. 
"The EU agenda is an internal reform agenda. Obviously, the areas where the acquis communautaire is the trickiest, like agriculture and environment, will be the 'busiest' ones. In general, I tend to think that the most difficult issues are the ones that [remain] unresolved. So, the most important thing is to have a smooth reform process," she said. 
President Boris Tadic says Serbia is ready to do what it takes. 
"The EU must tell us whether it wants us and also whether it is ready to work practically with us so we can meet all the obligations we have taken on," he said. "Europe should answer us honestly, without any excuses. We all have limits, but we won't allow that to be an excuse for doing nothing." 
Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic was even more frank. In an interview with German daily Spiegel, he said that the EU must not forget the Balkans because new crises were possible. "He who takes preventative action saves himself from having to fix the problem after it has begun," he said. 
