22/02/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 22/02/06
European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn visited Macedonia on Friday (17 February). They held talks with top-level officials, including President Branko Crvenkovski, Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski, Deputy Prime Ministers Radmila Sekerinska and Musa Xhaferi, and Foreign Minister Ilinka Mitreva. 
Receiving EU candidate status was "a major victory for your country" and "clear proof of the EU's commitment to your European future," Barroso said at a press conference. "I want to convey to your citizens a message of confidence and courage on your road to the EU." 
However, both Barroso and Rehn struck a cautionary note, saying that further progress towards membership hinged on reforms. 
In particular, the EC president said, Brussels will be watching to see whether this year's parliamentary elections meet European standards. He added that further progress is needed in judicial and police reform. Although Macedonia has taken important steps forward in overhauling its judiciary, he said, implementation is lagging. 
Commenting on Buckovski's earlier description of candidate status as a one-way ticket to the EU, Rehn said he agreed. 
However, he warned, "the speed is pretty much in your hands and reaching the next stations depends on how well you will be able to undertake the critical reforms and implement them on the ground." 
For his part, Buckovski said that Macedonia does not have time to wait. "We should continue on the reform course, we should continue the reform processes and move Macedonia towards the EU as fast as possible," he said. 
Barroso also touched on another key issue -- liberalising the EU's visa regime for researchers, students and members of the business community. Negotiations with Macedonia about the issue will begin on 28 March, he said. However, he stressed, it is up to the bloc's 25 member states to decide on the liberalisation. 
During the visit, Sekerinska and Michael Lee, director general of the Enlargement Directorate-General, signed two 53.9m-euro agreements. The first one is a 47.9m-euro CARDS programme for regional projects, and the second involves an additional 6m euros from CARDS use in the police reform process. 
