04/05/2009
(AFP, The Scotsman, MIA, AP, Reuters, DPA, Deutsche Welle, MIA, SNA - 03/05/09)
Thousands of Albanians, including political leaders, attended the funeral Sunday (May 3rd) of a Socialist Party (SP) lawmaker who was slain the previous night, about eight weeks before general elections that are critical for the country's EU bid. 
Fatmir Xhindi, 49, was gunned down by two unidentified assailants late Saturday just after parking his car outside his home in the town of Roskovec, about 100km southwest of Tirana. Police spokesman Klodian Branko said the politician, who was serving his third term as a member of Albania's 140-seat parliament, was hit by six bullets from a Kalashnikov automatic rifle. He died on his way to the regional hospital in the nearby town of Fier. 
Xhindi is the second lawmaker to be killed in Albania since the fall of communism in 1990. The first was Azem Hajdari, of Prime Minister Sali Berisha's right-wing Democratic Party, whose assassination in September 1998 sparked several days of unrest across the country. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn joined Albania's leaders and senior SP officials in condemning Saturday's killing and in urging authorities to act quickly to identify the perpetrators and bring them to justice. 
"I strongly condemn the murder and extend sincere condolences to Xhindi's family and friends," Rehn said in an official statement Sunday. 
It is an "extremely grave incident, a criminal act which should be investigated and solved as soon as possible", Berisha said. 
President Bamir Topi echoed his words, while Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli, who travelled to Roskovec to express her condolences to Xhindi's family, said she was "shocked". 
Describing his late colleague as a "symbol of maturity and friendship who exuded benevolence", Gramoz Ruci, a senior SP official, said he could not rule out the possibility that the killing was politically motivated. 
SP leader Edi Rama, who also travelled to Roskovec to comfort Xhindi's family, said it was "a premeditated murder and justice should find those responsible for this very serious criminal act". 
Police are investigating the incident and have offered a 250,000-euro reward for any information that would lead to the capture of Xhindi's killers. But they have refused to say if they have identified the motive. 
The incident came only a month after Albania's NATO entry and just five days after Berisha submitted his country's formal application for EU membership during a visit to Prague on April 28th. 
In its latest regular report on Albania's progress, which was released in November 2008, the European Commission (EC) urged the Balkan nation not to make that move before its June 28th general elections. 
All voting held in the country since 1990 has been marred by incidents and allegations of fraud. 
The EC report also called on Tirana to work harder to fight organised crime and corruption. 
