06/07/2011
By Alina Radu for Southeast European Times in Chisinau -- 06/07/11
Last week Moldovian authorities arrested six smugglers who were reportedly involved in selling Uranium 235, which can be used in nuclear weapons. The second case of uranium smuggling in less than a year has prompted authorities to look for more nuclear detection equipment to secure the uncontrolled border with the breakaway region of Transdniester -- the entry point for such loads. 
Gheorghe Cafcaliuc is a ten-year veteran of the Moldovan police force, under the auspices of the interior ministry. He managed the most recent uranium smuggling case and another in September 2010 
"It was no accident; it was four months of hard teamwork. It was dangerous in a way, but we knew we had to do it very professionally in order to avoid risks to the public. Who knows what a uranium smuggler has in mind when he understands he is facing police arrest? We had to act quickly and correctly. It is our duty," Cafcaliuc told SETimes. 
He also explained that the two groups of smugglers are unrelated, and that the investigation has been thorough. "We worked hard, we collected all data. There is already 90% proof that those people are guilty. They had the load and were arrested as they attempted to sell it. In the recent case, the group was talking with clients from Sudan." 
The investigation team explained that the uranium load was brought to Moldova through Transdniester. Borders of the region are porous, and are not controlled by official Moldovan authorities. An international team from the EU Border Assistance Mission (EUBAM) assists Moldova. 
Ronan Goggin, communications officer to EUBAM in Moldova and Ukraine, describes to SETimes EUBAM's role. "Advice and support EUBAM has given to its border-guard, customs, and law-enforcement partners in Moldova helps to prevent border related crime, and we are continually searching for ways to improve that support. We invest considerable time in providing training to our partners on aspects of combating organised crime, risk analysis and examination, and identification techniques." 
"We also facilitate information exchange on a national, regional and international level, and promote international co-operation and co-ordination -- which is key to combating the smuggling of illicit material and other cross-border crime. As for equipment, to the best of our knowledge, international donors have provided Moldova with some radiological and nuclear detection equipment." 
Interior Minister Alexei Roibu acknowledges that Moldova doesn't have the capacity to control the Transdniestrian border. "But we have good co-operation with US and EU structures, and they provided a lot of help to Moldovan police and border authorities," he tells SETimes. 
"The EU-Moldovan border already has nuclear detection equipment. And we are looking forward to have some mobile nuclear detection equipment for the rest. This would ensure that Moldova wouldn't be used by smugglers," Roibu added. 
