06/01/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 06/01/06
A bomb was thrown at a UN bus in Kosovo Wednesday night (4 January), causing damage but no injuries to the 55 passengers aboard. It was the second attack in the past month on the regular bus service provided between Dragas and Belgrade, and the second this week on a UN bus. 
"No injuries were caused and the passengers continued their journey on another bus under police escort," said UN spokesman Niray Singh. According to him, the bus passengers were Kosovo Albanians and members of the ethnic Bosnian and Turkish communities, as well as one person of Chinese nationality. 
Kosovo's ethnic minorities often use the route, but members of Kosovo's 90 per cent Albanian majority are also frequent passengers. 
The bombing follows the stoning Tuesday of a UN bus transporting Serbs from Rahoveci to Mitrovica. The Kosovo Police Service arrested four people in connection with that attack. 
Amid a string of recent incidents, UNMIK head Soren Jessen-Petersen has condemned "criminal violence" and warned that such acts are not in the interest of Kosovo. 
"Attempts by isolated individuals or groups to disrupt Kosovo's way forward must not be tolerated," Jessen-Petersen said in December. 
UNMIK Police and the Kosovo Police Service, meanwhile, have stepped up security measures to ensure that a safe and secure environment is maintained during the ongoing process of deciding Kosovo's future status. 
As part of Operation Stringent Security, police patrols have been increased and vehicle checkpoints set up throughout Kosovo, with a focus on potentially vulnerable areas. Some 352 people have been arrested for various offences, while 84 weapons have been seized. 
On 28 December, police operations were further intensified north of the divided city of Mitrovica, following violent incidents in the area. 
Police Commissioner Kai Vittrup reiterated on Wednesday that police would remain on high alert during the status negotiations process. 
"In the course of Operation Stringent Security, police will continue to prioritise measures in different parts of Kosovo in light of developments in the security situation," Vittrup said. 
Kosovo's police say that crime on the whole has been decreasing. However, 2006 started with a series of violent incidents, with two people killed by firearms over the last few days, in addition to the bus attacks. 
