31/07/2009
(Bloomberg, Standart - 31/07/09; Reuters, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Novinite, Focus - 30/07/09; AFP, Reuters - 29/07/09; Sofia Echo, Mediapool - 28/07/09; FT - 27/07/09; Novinite - 26/07/09)
Bulgaria must freeze the construction of the Belene Nuclear Power Plant if it doesn't find private investors for its majority stake in the project, Martin Dimitrov, chairman of the parliamentary committee on economy, energy, and tourism said Thursday (July 30th). 
"If there is a private investor, willing to risk his own money in the project, not the money of Bulgarian taxpayers, we may analyse the project," said Dimitrov, who also co-chairs the rightist Blue Coalition. 
Finance Minister Simeon Djankov says the government cannot earmark resources for the construction, when there is a pressing need to cut spending and increase revenues to bridge a 1.28 billion-euro budget deficit. The Bulgarian economy is likely to shrink 6.3% this year, according to him. 
"There is an 80% chance that the Belene project will be stopped," Bloomberg news agency quoted Djankov as saying in an interview Thursday. "The state has no funds to spare for its construction and it has been difficult to raise private funds because of the global crisis." 
Less than 24 hours before Bulgaria's new cabinet was sworn in Monday, Djankov, a former chief economist at the World Bank, also questioned the worth of the 4 billion-euro project. 
Official data released earlier this month showed that the previous government has spent more than 430m euros to prepare for the construction of a second 2,000 megawatt nuclear reactor on the Danube River, about 100km east of the existing Kozloduy plant. 
"I do not see the economic feasibility of this project," Djankov said in an interview with private national television station Nova TV on Sunday. "Even if we find private investors, Belene will not be profitable." 
Bulgaria holds a 51% stake in the project through the state-owned National Electricity Company. The remaining 49% of the shares are owned by Germany's RWE, which has been seeking a partner to split the funding burden and hedge the risk of participating in the venture. 
Bulgaria has contracted Russia's Atomstroyexport, along with France's Areva and Germany's Siemens, for construction of the nuclear reactor, which should become fully operational by mid-2014, according to plans. 
By that time, its cost could grow to more than 6 billion euros, which will push up the price of the electricity, experts have warned. 
Atomstroyexport was contracted to build the Belene plant under an agreement that was signed during former Russian President Vladimir Putin's visit to Sofia in January 2008. The country's Socialist-led government at the time struck two other major energy deals with Russia -- on the South Stream gas pipeline project and the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline -- during that visit. 
Djankov said the cabinet is assessing all large-scale energy projects to see "what the possibilities are for postponement or cancellation, in some cases, and what are the penalties implied". He also suggested that the country may decide to cancel its participation in the Burgas-Alexandroupolis oil pipeline. 
