16/04/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori and Erl Murati for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Tirana -- 16/04/13 
Albania and Kosovo customs and business representatives will form an information exchange system to overcome trade disputes. The system will speed up border procedures while maintaining product quality standards and other requirements, experts said. 
"We will exchange electronic data [to] make … clearances performed inside the territory. As in Albania, which earlier had such a system, but now also in Kosovo," Naim Huruglica, director of Kosovo's customs, said. 
Experts said Albania's market is important for Kosovo, particularly for the export of agricultural products. In 2012, Kosovo exported goods worth 38 million euros to Albania, while it imported goods from Albania worth 129 million euros. 
Kosovo's recent blockade of Albanian milk due to high levels of alfatoxin caused particular discontent in Tirana. Albania issued a decree forbidding foreign products from entering the country without a certificate of acceptable aflatoxin levels in them. Consequently, the National Food Authority ordered the import of 74 tonnes of flour imported from Kosovo to stop. 
"[R]egretfully, we have noticed that authorities and agencies in the regional countries carried out unilateral protection of their countries' products," Genc Ruli, minster of agriculture, food and consumer protection in Albania, told SETimes. 
Protectionist policies have benefited some at the expense of the majority of others, according to Fisnik Reqica, senior researcher at the Pristina-based RINVEST Institute. 
"The main reasons for [protectionism] appear to be of a political nature. It seems that interest groups have succeeded to push their agendas above national interests," Reqica told SETimes. 
Kosovo's potato and flour producers said they had particularly bad experiences in their attempts to export to Albania, while Albania's milk and cement companies said the same about exporting to Kosovo. 
"The commercial war between the companies from the two countries has reached an absurd stage where Albania and Kosovo authorities are protecting their own businesses," Altin Goxhaj, chairman of Albania's consumer protection office, an independent agency that offers assistance and legal protection to consumers, told SETimes. 
Experts thus lauded last week's meeting between the countries' officials as a first step towards removing trade barriers and pursuing economic integration, which they said will utilise both economies' potential in economic development. 
"This is a very fragile situation because there is no bigger abuse than using food security as a tool in the commercial fight between two companies. I think both parties should negotiate and search for a common strategy because the final aim is the consumer's interest," Goxhaj said. 
Reqica agreed and said Kosovo and Albania should follow the many countries with different cultures, languages, mentalities and history which managed to join in a common European market. 
"Enabling equal access to an all-Albanian market is a necessary precondition for the development and growth of businesses in both countries, which in turn will positively affect the development of the national economies," Reqica said. 
Are the Albanian and Kosovo governments on the right track to quell the trade disputes? Please share your opinion in the comments. 
