07/05/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 07/05/12
The overall situation on Sunday (May 6th) -- as Kosovo Serbs went to the polls to vote in presidential and general elections -- remained calm, although Kosovo Police, EULEX and KFOR increased their presence in the north and in some other areas in Kosovo, including Pristina. 
Pristina issued a statement Sunday as soon as the polls closed, saying that the elections where held to respect the rights of citizens with dual citizenship. 
However, the government criticised local authorities in the towns of Zvecan and Zubin Potok, who, despite opposition from the international community and Pristina, organised local elections. 
"The government emphasises that the Serbian municipal elections in two municipalities of Kosovo is illegal and they have no legal effect and political or democratic legitimacy," the government said. 
"OSCE and Kosovo police managed to organise elections in a very prompt manner and we are happy that no incidents were recorded. This was the very first time Kosovo's sole right to exercise parliamentary procedures for the territory of Kosovo, was guaranteed by the entire international community, from the EU and US to OSCE and UN," Kosovo's Deputy Foreign Minister Petrit Selimi told SETimes. 
He says that the local elections will not be recognised and have no legal effect in the eyes of Pristina and international community. However, the new government in Belgrade has the final call. 
"These are futile attempts of the extremists who know that the next steps in Kosovo entail closure of parallel institutions -- paramount to the request from EU to the new Serbian government. Parallel local elections are not events to think about," Selimi said. 
Gerard Gallucci, former UN administrator for Mitrovica and chairman of the board of TransConflict, told SETimes that the commitment of KFOR and OSCE showed how much the role of international missions can help in Kosovo. 
"With the active engagement of KFOR and the OSCE -- both in Kosovo under a UN mandate -- people were able to exercise their political rights without difficulty or provocation. This shows that peacekeeping still has a role to play," Gallucci said. 
The only incidents to occur were the recent arrests -- in southern Serbia (Presevo Valley) of eight Albanians, and on Saturday of a Kosovar travelling with his family through Serbia -- by Serbian Police. 
The arrests and the calls from Pristina and Tirana to go to the polls led to around 70% of Albanians in southern Serbia casting votes-- the biggest turnout for those municipalities. 
"The next stage of contacts between Belgrade and Pristina will have to focus on making the life of people in Presevo Valley easier. But first and foremost, provocations and arbitrary arrests there must stop," Selimi said. 
Gallucci said that the arrests had to do with the vote than with rule of law. 
"I suspect the timing of the arrests in Presevo had more to do with the Serbian elections than any sudden interest in 'law and order.' But it is also noteworthy that the Albanian community did not respond to the provocation," he said. 
"I am happy that everything went well. We are tired of problems; we need a better future for our children," Suzana Dehari, a school teacher in Pristina, told SETimes. 
But Faton Krasniqi, a law student, said that Pristina failed to do what it said it would, and stop local elections. 
"They said local elections will never be allowed, but they were organised. This is not how serious governments do their jobs -- just making statements," he told SETimes. 
The elections took place at 90 polling stations in 28 locations. 
Though results from Kosovo have not been announced, judging by the results of voting in Serbia proper, these votes could be the ones to tip the scale and decide the entry of certain parties into parliament. 
Preliminary results had Vojislav Seselj's Serbian Radical Party below the 5% election threshold, but the votes from Kosovo could change that. 
State Secretary at the Ministry for Kosovo Oliver Ivanovic praised the fact that the elections passed without incident, but told SETimes that the lack of voting stations presented a problem. 
"The small number of polling stations prevented more Serbs from voting. About two thirds of polling stations were eliminated, because the OSCE lacked the manpower to cover all the polling stations that are usually opened," Ivanovic said. 
SETimes correspondent Bojana Milovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this article. 
