17/09/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 17/09/04
Serbia will hold yet another election on 19 September to choose members of local assemblies as well as mayors of major cities. Over 60,000 candidates are running for four-year terms in more than 150 municipalities. On the same day, voters in the northern province of Vojvodina will cast their ballots for members of parliament. 
Polls show that the two most popular parties are still the Democratic Party (DS), led by Serbian President Boris Tadic, and the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party (SRS), whose leader, war crimes indictee Vojislav Seselj, is awaiting trial at The Hague. The Strength of Serbia Movement, recently founded by business tycoon Bogoljub Karic, is next. The ruling coalition parties -- the Democratic Party of Serbia, G17 Plus and Serbian Renewal Movement -- are at the bottom of the popularity list. 
Belgrade’s mayoral race is of special interest, as the capital accounts for a quarter of the country's population and GDP. Nine candidates have been campaigning fiercely for over a month, and the outcome is expected to be a rerun of the June presidential elections, with the DS and SRS likely to send their respective deputy leaders, Nenad Bogdanovic and Aleksandar Vucic, into a runoff. Pollsters Marten Board International and Faktor Plus both predict that Bogdanovic and Vucic will each win 25 per cent of Sunday's vote. 
If opposition parties win a majority in the local elections, what will happen to the government of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica? Marten Board's Dejan Vuk Stankovic believes the cabinet will be "seriously shaken" and may find it hard to finish its term. 
Occasional internal bickering weakens the ruling coalition, and although the government is not legally obliged to call early parliamentary elections, polls show that 70 per cent of the electorate supports the idea. 
Ethnic and regional parties are expected to fare well Sunday, which will increase their chances during the next parliamentary elections. This could considerably relax interethnic relations, which have worsened lately amid a series of incidents in ethnically-mixed Vojvodina. 
Analysts agree that the local elections will be a significant step forward in creating and organising the democratic system in Serbia. After several election cycles, including the 2003 parliamentary race and this year's vote for president, it appears that frequent visits to polling booths are needed to stabilise Serbia’s political scene. 
