06/10/2010
Analysis by Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 06/10/10
Macedonia launched a lustration process in 2008, but it has already hit snags. Tensions between the government and the opposition arose when Macedonia's Constitutional Court President Trendafil Ivanovski was fingered as a collaborator. 
According to the Lustration Commission, he worked with the Yugoslav secret services in the 1990s. However, he denies the accusation. 
 "I have no intention to resign because I haven't done anything. I am a victim of the former regime. My file says I was struggling for the independence and unification of Macedonia," Ivanovski said last week after a commission hearing. 
The commission is comprised of 11 independent experts on public trust, selected by parliament last year. 
As the Ivanovski case demonstrates, the process is highly politicised. To the government, the Constitutional Court has become a political instrument in the hands of the Social Democrats and their leader, Branko Crvenkovski, through which the opposition can negate major decisions adopted by a parliamentary majority. 
The Social Democrats, meanwhile, believe Ivanovski's lustration amounts to "payback" by Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski's administration. They have called on Gruevski to stop attacking the court. 
Constitutional law professor and former Parliament Speaker Savo Klimovski thinks the lustration is late in coming and appears driven by questionable motives. 
 "What was needed to be done [in 1991] is being done now. The time gap allowed many things to be erased from the archives, and many documents are missing. This will be a process of political revenge, nothing else," Klimovski told SETimes. 
However, former Internal Affairs Minister Pavle Trajanov claims the process of destroying archived documents started much earlier. 
 "The first wave of destroying such documents dates from the time of Aleksandar Rankovic, when he was chief of the Yugoslav secret services. The second was before the 1990 parliamentary elections ... and another cleansing of the files was done after independence in 1991, according to the internal rules of the State Security Agency," Trajanov told SETimes. 
"Today, traces can still be found of collaboration with the secret services, but I think they are not enough to establish responsibility and guilt. This way, the process can't be whole," he added. 
Many Macedonians say it is high time to close the chapter on the communist era once and for all. 
"Most post-communist countries overcame this issue, and we should do the same but in a professional manner. The government must implement lustration honourably and without compromises. We see there is a will to do that, but the opposition should not create obstacles," Skopje resident Bosko Ristevski, 51, told SETimes. 
