16/08/2005
(Sofia News Agency, International Herald Tribune, Pari - 16/08/05; AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, BNN, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik, Vseki Den - 15/08/05)
Nearly two months after inconclusive parliamentary elections on 25 June, Bulgaria was expected to get a new government Tuesday (16 August), a day after the country's top three political parties agreed on a coalition. The deal ended a political stalemate that threatened to stall the country's EU entry in 2007. 
Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) leader Sergey Stanishev, 39, has been named prime minister-designate. He will head a cabinet that includes representatives from the centrist National Movement Simeon II (NMS-II) of outgoing Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg, as well as from the predominantly ethnic Turkish Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF). "European integration, economic growth and social responsibility" are the coalition's clear priorities, Stanishev said. "Our goal is to meet the expectations of Bulgarians, to give Bulgaria the possibility of joining the EU and to improve living standards," he added. 
Efforts to strike a similar deal ended in failure last month, largely due to disagreements over who should be prime minister. Monday's breakthrough became possible after the three parties agreed that decisions on important issues would be taken by consensus, according to Saxe-Coburg. 
Both the BSP, which won the 25 June poll, and the second-place finisher NMS-II proved unable to form a government after receiving mandates from President Georgi Parvanov. On Monday, after the deal was clinched, he gave a new mandate to the MRF, the third-place finisher. It then nominated Stanishev as prime minister. Parliament already elected him to the post on 27 July, only to invalidate his election by failing to approve his proposed cabinet. 
The new three-party coalition controls 169 of the 240 seats in Bulgaria's legislature and is expected to easily pass the confidence vote scheduled for Tuesday afternoon. 
Under Monday's deal, the BSP will have eight ministers, the NMS-II will have five and the MRF three. The coalition partners will also have one deputy minister each. The only cabinet member not representing any of the three parties is Plamen Oresharski, who has been nominated as finance minister. A former member of the right-wing Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), he served as deputy finance minister in the government of former Prime Minister Ivan Kostov. 
Other key members of the proposed cabinet include outgoing Interior Minister Georgi Petkanov, who has been named justice minister. He will be replaced at the interior ministry by Rumen Petkov of the BSP. Meglena Kuneva is to remain in her post as European affairs minister. 
One of the biggest structural changes is the proposed merging of the economy and energy ministries into a single body, to be headed by BSP deputy leader Rumen Ovcharov. 
The coalition's comfortable parliamentary majority paves the way for the rapid adoption of a number of legislative measures, including a new penal code, required for Bulgaria's EU entry in 2007. If the country fails to meet its reform commitments, its membership can be postponed by at least a year. The European Commission is due to publish a key report on Bulgaria's readiness for membership this autumn. 
"This is a positive signal to Europe, and I think and hope that with a common effort, we can achieve (EU) integration, the goal we have been working towards for years," Saxe-Coburg said Monday, after the coalition deal was reached. 
