06/03/2007
(FT - 06/03/07; HINA, AP, UPI - 05/03/07)
Croatia's Supreme Court announced on Monday (March 5th) its decision to uphold a lower court's verdict against eight former military policemen, convicted of war crimes committed against Serbs at the Lora detention facility near the southern coastal city of Split in 1992. 
At the end of a retrial in March 2006, the Split County Court sentenced the eight -- Tomislav Duic, who was in charge of the prison at the time of the events, and guards Tonci Vrkic, Davor Banic, Miljenko Bajic, Josip Bikic, Emilio Bungur, Ante Gudic and Andjelko Botic -- to six to eight years in prison. The former policemen were convicted of torturing and beating Serb civilians held at the camp, and of killing two inmates and seriously injuring two others. 
Citing the Supreme Court's decision, which was taken about a month before being published on Monday, reports said the defence team's appeal, including demands that the men be released or granted a retrial, had been turned down. 
The original trial against the eight the Split County Court ended in November 2002 with their acquittal. Human rights activists sharply criticised the proceedings as marred by controversy, bias, mishandling of evidence and harassment of witnesses. Some of the survivors of the atrocities committed at Lora refused to take the witness stand, citing personal safety concerns. 
In late 2004, the Supreme Court sent the case back to the same court, ruling that the first trial was biased and "fraught with serious flaws in criminal procedure as well as erroneous and incomplete facts". The retrial, handled by a different panel of judges, opened in September the following year. 
Only three of the defendants were in custody at the start of the retrial and a fourth turned himself in a month later. The rest, including Duic, were tried in absentia. They have been on the run since their 2002 acquittal. 
As it handed down its verdict last year, the Split County Court decided that time already spent in detention would be credited towards the sentences. It also took as mitigating circumstances the fact that the defendants participated in the defence of their country in the 1991-1995 conflict and that they were family men with young children, Croatian news agency HINA reported on Monday. 
Given the gravity of the charges and the way it was initially handled, the Lora case was viewed as a test of the Croatian judiciary's ability to conduct its own war crimes trials. 
According to HINA, five of the defendants in the Lora case, including Duic, are also still being investigated on charges of inhumane treatment of about 30 Serb prisoners of war at the camp in 1992. Three of the prisoners died as a result. 
