30/09/2010
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 30/09/10
As the Turkish government renews its drive to resolve long-running tensions with the country's Kurdish minority, analysts have voiced optimism over its latest efforts. 
 Emboldened by a referendum victory earlier this month, Turkey's ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) government has embarked on intensive diplomacy aimed at ending the 26-year insurgency of the militant Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK). 
In the past week, Turkish ministers and intelligence and military officials have met with their US and Iraqi counterparts to try to find a way of convincing the PKK to lay down its weapons. 
On September 20th, a ceasefire by the guerrilla group expired, but was replaced by a "non-action period" pending an announcement by its executive council expected any day. 
According to Professor Emrullah Uslu, a terrorism expert at Istanbul's Yeditepe University, the chances of the ceasefire holding are good. 
"I'm optimistic this time," he told SETimes. "The government is taking it seriously and wants to convince them to maintain the ceasefire until the next election [expected in June 2011]. It's likely that this will happen." 
He highlighted the weekend meeting between Interior Minister Besir Atalay and Massoud Barzani, head of the regional administration in the autonomous region of Iraqi Kurdistan, as a good sign. 
The Qandil Mountains in northern Iraq are the current main hideout of the guerillas, and convincing them to move into the UN-controlled Makhmur refugee camp could be a key component to lasting peace, he said. 
However, efforts to convince the guerrillas to withdraw their forces within southeast Turkey could face internal resistance. 
 "The counterargument within the PKK is that moving units into northern Iraq is a strategic loss because if the negotiations do not end in peace, it will take at least a year for the PKK to redeploy its units back into the mountains," he said. 
Henri Barkey, an analyst with the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, said that a serious attempt to resolve the Kurdish problem would have to wait until after next year's parliamentary elections, but that in the meantime the government should aim to lay the groundwork. 
 "This is Turkey's biggest and most complex problem and they need to chart a very careful course," he told SETimes. 
The AKP was criticised for its lack of planning in its previous attempt to address the long-running grievances of the Kurdish minority, in May 2009. 
The Kurds' main political group, the Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), which has strong links to the PKK, is currently demanding limited regional autonomy, Kurdish language education, changes to anti-terror laws, and a drop in the current threshold of 10% needed by political parties to gain representation in parliament. 
"They need to consult with the local community; they need to consult with NGOs and charities; they need to talk to the CHP [the main opposition Republican People's Party]," said Barkey. 
He added that the referendum result and the continuing PKK ceasefire are weakening nationalist hawks. 
"The Turkish nationalists have lost a great deal. The government's hand is considerably stronger than it was and the problem facing the nationalists is that they will become more and more irrelevant if the violence does not pick up." 
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan appeared to slam the door last week on two of the Kurds' key demands, when he ruled out making any changes to the country's unitary state structure, or allowing Kurdish language education. 
Barkey believes, however, that the calmer atmosphere brought by a lasting ceasefire could soften this stance. 
"There are red lines and there are red lines," he said. "I think Erdogan and company understand very well that the current policy doesn't work, that it hasn't worked for 90 years now." 
Umit Firat, an independent Kurdish intellectual, said that despite a lack of "concrete steps" by the current government, the omens look good for progress on long-denied Kurdish cultural rights and an end to violence. 
"I believe that the final countdown to solve these problems has begun," he told SETimes. 
