18/09/2009
(EurActiv, Euobserver - 18/09/09; Reuters, AFP, DPA, Bloomberg, FT, Wall Street Journal, BBC, Swedish EU Presidency - 17/09/09)
The heads of the 27 EU nations agreed on Thursday (September 17th) to push for curbs on bankers' bonuses at next week's G20 summit in the US city of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
"The bonus bubble bursts tonight," Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt said after the talks. "Banks, some of which owe their very survival to massive support from taxpayers' money, should not be able to take advantage of good results in the future pretending that the crisis was just a minor setback." 
Reinfeldt, whose country currently holds the six-month rotating EU presidency, chaired the Union's informal summit in Brussels on Thursday evening. Sweden called the emergency talks so that the bloc can forge a common stance for the G20 meeting on September 24th and 25th and ensure that the seven EU leaders going to Pittsburgh will represent the views of all member states. 
The leaders of the group of 20 developed and emerging economies will meet for the third time since November 2008 to assess progress in coping with the world's worst financial and economic crisis in 80 years. 
The participants in Thursday's talks agreed that the EU will seek the imposition of binding rules for financial institutions on variable remunerations, backed up by the threat of sanctions at the national level. 
The rules should envision measures to ensure that the board of a financial institution has appropriate oversight on the size of compensation and the risk involved, the communique from the meeting said. Another key principle was that bonuses should be set at an appropriate level in relation to fixed remuneration, and hinge on the bank's revenues or profits. These payments could be cancelled in the event the institution's performance takes a turn for the worse, the communique noted. 
"We must show zero tolerance for any return to the bad old ways," European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso said. "Our citizens are understandably horrified at reports of banks receiving public money paying exorbitant bonuses." 
The EU leaders also agreed that fiscal stimuli plans need to be maintained. With recovery still fragile, it would be premature to withdraw government support now, they said, stressing, however, that the signs of stabilisation suggest it is time to start mapping out co-ordinated exit strategies. 
"The G20 should reaffirm its determination to continue implementing co-ordinated policy measures in order to develop the basis for sustainable growth and to avoid a repetition of the present financial crisis," the communique said. "Efforts must be maintained until recovery is secured." 
The EU leaders also noted Thursday that the IMF should play a central role in the process of co-ordination of global macroeconomic policies. They also expressed the bloc's readiness to inject into the Washington-based institution an additional 50 billion euros, on top of the 75 billion euros agreed earlier. 
Another major topic on the agenda Thursday was climate change and financial support to underpin developing countries' efforts to deal with the problem. 
Noting that climate is changing at a much faster pace than anticipated, EU leaders stressed that there is a pressing need to speed up negotiations on the issue, so that a deal may be struck soon. 
"The risks posed by climate change are real and can already be seen," they said in the statement. "This underlines the urgent need to reach a global, ambitious and comprehensive agreement" at the UN talks on climate change in Copenhagen in December.
