02/11/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --02/11/10
Plagued for years by inadequate funding, Serbia's school system is receiving a boost in the form of a 100m-euro investment loan that will be implemented over the next four years. Currently, the country's annual investment in education is about 3% of GDP, the lowest in Europe. 
As part of the project, dubbed Modernisation of Schools in Serbia, half the funds were secured from the European Investment Bank (EIB), while the other half will come from the local governments whose schools will receive the money. The investment project will take place in three stages -- all of them to be finalised by 2014, Education Minister Zarko Obradovic said. 
 "The first stage -- through 2012 -- will include the expansion or completion of construction of 12 [new] elementary and high schools. Existing schools lack accommodation capacity, [forcing classes to be] held in three shifts," Obradovic said. He said the second stage will boost IT in schools and a portion of funds will implement the National Education Strategy. The third stage will focus on the reconstruction of existing schools. 
"We want to ensure the best possible education conditions for our students according to European standards. The economic progress of our country depends on it," Obradovic said. 
He recalled that, with help from the EIB, Serbia finished the construction of eight new schools and reconstructed four existing ones in 2009. 
The first stage of the Modernisation of Schools project involves the towns of Lapovo, Jagodina, Novi Pazar, Novi Sad, Aleksinac and Nis, as well as Belgrade. 
Jagodina Mayor Dragan Markovic said that an increasing number of students from neighbouring towns were going to school in his town, making an expansion of school capacities sorely needed. 
 "Once again it is proven that forming a pro-European government was the right thing to do. Europe has not forgotten us and is helping where we need help the most," Markovic said. 
Novi Pazar Mayor Meho Mahmutovi
c thanked the education ministry and the EIB for recognising the needs of a city that boasts the youngest population in Serbia. "We need this investment to increase the capacity of our schools, for the young people to stay in Novi Pazar," Mahmutovic said. 
EIB representative Dominique Courbin said that by investing in education, Serbia is investing in the future. 
"It is important for us to support the development of education, in the EU member countries and membership candidates or potential candidates, as the case is with Serbia." 
