17/11/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 17/11/04
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader paid a historic visit to Belgrade on Monday (15 November), meeting with Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic and Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica. It was the first such visit by a Croatian head of government since the collapse of the former Yugoslavia and the subsequent conflict. 
The talks stressed Croatia's and Serbia-Montenegro's common goal of joining the EU and their determination to resolve the remaining issues between them, including refugee returns and the search for missing persons. The two countries also signed an agreement on protection of ethnic minorities. 
"The future of Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro is in a joint Europe which is uniting," Sanader said, adding that his country has "turned a new page and entered the era of reconciliation and a European future". He pledged that Croatia -- which expects to start accession talks with the EU early next year -- would stand ready to assist its neighbour's bid for membership. 
 "I am certain the principle will be valid here that the sooner Croatia joins the EU, the sooner it gets closer to trans-Atlantic integration and NATO, then the sooner Serbia and Montenegro will do so too," he said. 
Following talks with Sanader, Marovic said Serbia-Montenegro and Croatia have "confirmed their joint political goal of better bilateral relations, strengthening of regional stability and progress towards membership in the EU". He also said Belgrade should note the steps Croatia has taken towards meeting its international obligations, particularly co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. 
"Serbia and Montenegro must fulfil these painful things the same way Croatia has done," Marovic said 
 Kostunica said future meetings in Belgrade and Zagreb would make it possible to "devote ourselves to resolving issues that the past has opened, such as the problems of refugees and property, as well as issues that will take us into the future". "
The positions we find ourselves currently in our states permit us to deal with something that is of utmost importance, not only in the interest of better relations between Croatia and Serbia, but in the interest of overall stability in the region. The advancement of relations between the two countries in all areas is of extraordinary importance, a good message and a sign to Europe," Kostunica said. 
Belgrade and Zagreb established diplomatic ties in 1996, but the first top-level visit did not come until last year, when Croatian President Stipe Mesic went to Belgrade. During that trip, Mesic and Marovic both offered apologies for the violence that took place during the Balkan conflicts. 
