05/08/2009
By Marina Roganovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica --05/08/09
Theatre City Festival, Budva, through August 20th  
 "I can believe anything, provided it is incredible" is not only a quote by Oscar Wilde -- it is also the tagline of this year's Theatre City Festival in Budva. Despite the ongoing financial crisis, Budva is bankrolling one of the biggest art/theatre festivals in the region. 
The Theatre City Festival opened on July 10th, and will run until August 20th. The annual festival, which is almost a quarter century old, continues to astonish visitors from all over Europe. There is plenty to do at Theatre City, such as plays, concerts, art exhibitions, video projections and book readings. 
 Stages are located in and around churches, Poet's Square, the square in front of the Old Town and on local beaches. 
Kotor Carnival, Kotor, August 6th-8th 
Kotor tries to bring the cultural movement of the Renaissance back to life every year during the annual Kotor Carnival. 
This year's three-day event opens on Thursday (August 6th), with something called Abrum. "Abrum is a call to all those who are still undecided whether to join in, and it is also the most important thing to do before the carnival starts," said Vasilije Bajrovic, one of the organisers. 
At Abrum, majorettes, marching bands and festival goers decked out in costumes, parade around the Old Town. When the sun sets, seafood lovers gorge themselves with local fish at a gala dubbed the Fisherman's Festival. 
The second night is called The Town of Countless Masks, where performance groups from Italy, Serbia, Croatia, Macedonia Montenegro and other countries reveal their costumes in the town square prior to a concert by the rock group Amadeus, who will make the two-hour trip from Dubrovnik, and hometown favorite Tri kvarta. 
The carnival closes with a spectacular costume parade down the shoreline and back into the Old Town for a party that lasts until dawn. 
Petrovac Jazz Festival, Petrovac, August 31st-September 3rd  
It's still warm during the beginning of September in Petrovac, but a breeze from the Adriatic and the cool sounds of jazz will refresh the crowd gathered at the town's amphitheatre. 
The third annual Petrovac Jazz Festival will kick off at 7pm on August 31st. 
 "We set our stages in natural environments," said festival director Vinko Mihajlovic. A stage will also be placed on the terrace of Castello, the old castle-turned-nightclub. 
A dozen international jazz groups will play over the four-day event, which will wrap up with the Belgrade Dixieland Orchestra on September 3rd. 
"The festival is sure to give out an echo throughout Montenegro; some of the performers will appear in Podgorica two days after it wraps," said Mihajlovic. 
This year's festival will, for the first time, include film screenings. 
