19/01/2011
(Reuters, EurActiv, Focus News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, Sega - 19/01/11; The Sofia Echo, Sofia News Agency - 18/01/11)
Prime Minister Boyko Borisov's cabinet decided on Wednesday (January 19th) to seek parliament's support for its overall policy, saying it would submit a request for a vote of confidence in the government later in the day. 
The move was approved by the political leadership of the ruling centre-right Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria (GERB) party at a late night meeting Tuesday, amid a wiretapping scandal that has reverberated for two weeks now. 
It erupted on January 5th, when the Sofia-based weekly Galeria published the leaked transcripts of three telephone conversations between Customs Agency Director Vanyo Tanov and his superiors -- Finance Minister Simeon Djankov and his deputy, Vladislav Goranov. 
Borisov became personally embroiled in the scandal Friday, when the same tabloid made public the contents of a second batch of wiretaps. One of the tapes was of a telephone conversation in which the prime minister tells Tanov to call off a raid at the "Ledenika" beer factory, as he had "made commitments" to its owner to protect him from investigation. 
The authenticity of the recordings has not been officially verified. The Galeria is a paper believed to be close to Alexei Petrov, a former national security agent, suspected of involvement in organised crime group and currently under house arrest. Borisov insists that the tapes have been "manipulated". 
The main opposition Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), which has been accusing the government of an uncontrolled use of special surveillance, said earlier this week it was planning to call a no-confidence vote against the government. 
Borisov's decision to seek parliament's support for his minority government was thus seen as a preemptive strike. 
The debate and vote on the cabinet's motion could take place as early as Thursday, according to Iskra Fidosova, the head of parliament's legal committee and chair of the GERB caucus. 
Although Borisov's party holds only 117 of the 240 seats in parliament, it is expected to survive the vote. 
Volen Siderov, leader of the nationalist Ataka party, which has 20 seats and has been supporting the GERB government since it came to power in July 2009, promised his party's backing for the cabinet. 
The right-wing Blue Coalition meanwhile indicated that its 14 representatives would also vote in favour of the government, provided it would agree to stop the Belene nuclear power plant project. 
It also pinned its support for Borisov's cabinet on four other conditions, including giving higher priority to the Nabucco gas pipeline than the South Stream project, introduction of a fiscal board, and removal of all communist-era state security agents from office. The last request called for the dismissal of Interior Minister Tsvetan Tsvetanov. 
Lawmakers representing the Movements for Rights and Freedoms indicated their party would vote against the government. 
