02/11/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 02/11/11
Kosovo started to deliver its biometric passports on Monday (October 31st), fulfilling one of the more important criteria for visa liberialisation with the EU. Prime Minister Hashim Thaci hailed it as a "big step". 
"It is a document that equalises the citizens of the Republic of Kosovo with those of the EU," Thaci said at a ceremony during which the first biometric passports were handed over. He dubbed the occasion "Day of European Kosovo". 
Fatos Bajcinovci, Zymrije Grajcevci and Ender Alija were the first to receive the new passports. Bajcinovci told reporters that he hopes he will soon be able to travel without a visa. 
Kosovo, however, needs to fulfill other criteria before that becomes a reality. 
"The main and most difficult pillar to be implemented for Kosovo is rule of law and public safety, fighting corruption and organised crime," Fatmir Curri, European integration programme co-ordinator in the Kosovar Civil Society Foundation, told SETimes. 
Political will is not enough, he said. "[It] has to be transformed into concrete plans of action and real progress." 
Kosovo is the only country in the Balkans that has not yet secured a visa liberalisation agreement with the EU. The fact that five EU members have not recognised Kosovo is a major obstacle. 
"The non-recognition from five EU countries has had a high cost on us," Curri said. 
EU spokesperson Maja Kocijancic says the Union remains committed to the process. 
"The EU has made a clear commitment that the whole region is eligible for that. Obviously this doesn't come without filling the criteria; that's why a road map was created," Kocijancic told SETimes. 
Other countries in the region have signed agreements with the EU on repatriation/reintegration, and the European Commission has negotiated the deals on behalf of the Union. But Kosovo faces unique hurdles, Curri said. 
"Kosovo needs additional efforts to sign those agreements one by one, which makes it a sui generis case in this process as well. These agreements are not enough," Curri added. 
The adoption of repatriation/reintegration legislation will help pave the way for the EU to officially extend guidelines for visa liberalisation for Kosovo. That could happen by the end of this year. 
"Through the guidelines, which are being prepared by the European Commission, dialogue can start finally in December," Curri said, adding that countries in the region such as Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, needed two to three years in order to complete the negotiations. 
In such a case, Kosovo could be able to benefit from visa free movement in December 2013, he said. 
Biometric passports and ID cards -- expected to cost Kosovo around 10m euros -- are among the 40 or 50 criteria that Kosovo must fulfill, Curri added. 
