16/02/2006
(Reuters, Athens News Agency, Macedonian Press Agency, Hellenic Radio, Cyprus News Agency, Makfax - 15/02/06)
Resolving the Cyprus issue and improving ties with neighbouring Turkey will be top priorities for new Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis, who was sworn in Wednesday (15 February), along with nine other newly appointed ministers and deputy ministers. 
"My priorities will be the big issues we face -- firstly Cyprus, then developing Greek-Turkish relations and the broader development of the Balkans," Bakoyannis said during a ceremony at the foreign ministry. 
Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis announced the first major shuffle of his cabinet Tuesday, almost two years after his centre-right New Democracy (ND) party came to power in March 2004. Finance Minister Giorgos Alogoskoufis, Development Minister Dimitris Sioufas and Education Minister Marietta Giannakou retained their seats. Karamanlis gave up his culture minister portfolio, assigning it to George Voulgarakis, who was serving as public order minister until the shuffle was announced. Another important change saw Evangelos Meimarakis replace Spilios Spiliotopoulos as defence minister. Six deputy ministry posts, including some created for the 2004 Athens Olympics, were abolished. 
Bakoyannis, the first woman to be put in charge of Greek foreign policy and a popular Athens mayor since October 2002, replaced veteran diplomat Petros Molyviatis in this second highest government post. 
A former culture minister, Bakoyannis is the eldest daughter of Costas Mitsotakis, who was prime minister from 1990 to 1993. She is the widow of Pavlos Bakoyannis, a journalist and prominent centre-right politician who was gunned down in September 1989 by the 17 November terrorist group. 
A high-profile figure in Greek political life, Bakoyannis left her position as ND deputy ahead of the October 2002 local elections to join the Athens mayoral race. She won a landslide victory over the candidate of the then ruling PASOK [Panhellenic Socialist Movement] party. 
Assuming office Wednesday, Bakoyannis pledged to uphold the country's interests and to follow the principles of consistency and continuity, free of partisanship. 
"Our foreign policy is exercised with the aim to … advance the principles of democracy and the peaceful resolution of differences," the Athens News Agency (ANA) quoted her as saying, pledging to exercise diplomacy with "principles, a programme, realism, and creativity". 
Describing his country's foreign policy in an address Wednesday, Karamanlis said it "is summed up in the triptych: stability, co-operation and development". 
Greece, he said, would continue to invest in the development of good relations with all its neighbours, to support their EU integration aspirations and to work for the improvement and full normalisation of relations with Turkey. What Athens wants more than anything, ANA quoted Karamanlis as also noting, is a settlement of the Cyprus issue so the last remaining walls on European territory would fall. 
"We want a functional and viable solution compatible with the principles on which the EU is founded," the prime minister said. 
Other areas on which Greek foreign policy would focus, according to Karamanlis, include economic diplomacy and expanding and enhancing Greece's international co-operation. 
