09/10/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 09/10/07
One of Serbia's most legendary basketball players, Vlade Divac, said goodbye to the sport at a three-day series of events, and announced that he will now focus on humanitarian work. The farewell events took place last month in Belgrade and in Divac's hometown, Prijepolje. 
At a fundraising dinner organised with the help of Serbia's royalty, the Karadjordjevic family, the basketball star unveiled his "You Can Too" campaign, part of the Humanitarian Organisation Divac. Some 70,000 euros were collected for the purchase of farms for refugees who currently live in collective centres around the country. 
Attending the event were several of Divac's friends and fellow basketball players. They included Croatia's Toni Kukoc, former Greek national team player, and NBA stars Chris Webber, Scott Pollard, Glenn Rice and Bobby Jackson, as well as coach Gregg Popovich. Uniforms belonging to Kobe Bryant and Serbian tennis player Novak Djokovic were auctioned for 16,000 euros each. 
For day two of the celebration, Divac organised a concert in downtown Belgrade. Over 10,000 attended. During the event, people were able to donate money for Divac's charity auction by sending text messages. Some 125,000 euros were collected. 
 "I want to thank you for the enormous and selfless support you have given me during my basketball career, which started in Serbia and is also ending here," Divac said at the celebration. 
"My most important game begins today. With your help, the biggest and best team is heading for its most important victory -- helping people left without their land, home and friends, and those who are living in inhumane conditions," the player said 
Chris Webber of the Detroit Pistons also addressed the crowd, saying "Good evening, Serbia" in the Serbian language. He said Divac is "not only … a great player, but he also has a big heart. He is the best man I have ever met." 
NBA legends Kareem Abdul-Jabbar and Magic Johnson, coach Phil Jackson, as well as rapper Snoop Dogg and the Red Hot Chili Peppers also greeted the crowd and talked about Divac via video. 
Divac officially wrapped up his career in his hometown of Prijepolje. The player scored his final point by holding up a 12-year-old boy, a refugee from Croatia, and helping him score a slam dunk. With visible emotion, he told fans "My wish has been to show that it does not matter where a person is born. That even if they come from a small town, they can still make their dreams come true." 
 Divac started playing in the small Prijepolje club of Elan, and went on to play in Sloga, Belgrade's Partizan and finally for the LA Lakers, the Charlotte Hornets and the Sacramento Kings. He is also one of the most popular people in Serbia, and among the most well-known Serbs internationally. 
