13/09/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 13/09/04
The Office of the High Representative (OHR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) will be restructured and downsized to reflect progress BiH has made towards full statehood and normalisation in recent years, High Representative Paddy Ashdown told his staff last month. 
The reorganisation will involve a 25 per cent reduction in staff before the end of the year, and a restructuring of the OHR headquarters and regional and field offices, aimed at focusing them on the priority tasks remaining in the OHR's Mission Implementation Plan. These are largely related to assisting the BiH authorities implement reforms that have been or are now being translated into legislation, rather than launching new initiatives. 
Under the Dayton Peace Agreement, whose provisions the OHR is helping to put into action, the office has the status of a diplomatic mission to BiH. It is made up of diplomats seconded by the governments of Peace Implementation Council countries, international experts hired directly, and national staff from BiH. In January 2004, the OHR employed 108 internationals (35 staff members and 73 contractors) and 467 national contractors. The OHR has regional offices in Banja Luka, Mostar, Brcko, Tuzla and Sarajevo, as well as 14 field offices. A representation office in Brussels works together with international organisations outside BiH. 
"The fact that the OHR is able to downsize by nearly a quarter is a tribute to the progress that BiH has made in recent years towards full statehood," Ashdown said. "That has always been the OHR's mission: to put BiH irreversibly on the road to full statehood and Europe, and then leave. There is still a way to go, but increasingly it will be the EU that helps you get there. BiH wants to join the EU, and the EU is committed to helping people of BiH." 
"That is why my own role as EU Special Representative (EUSR) is growing," he added. "That is why this office is increasingly becoming the Office of the EUSR as well as the Office of the High Representative. And that is why the EU is providing a military force to take over many of SFOR's Dayton tasks later this year." 
Ashdown stressed that international determination to help BiH through its transition remains strong. "The international community does not have an exit strategy here. It has an entry strategy for BiH to join Europe. And we will stay until the job is done," he said. 
