03/06/2013
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 03/06/13
New Bulgarian Prime Minister Plamen Oresharski plans to focus on fiscal stability and measures to address citizen's grievances. 
A former finance minister, Oresharski was elected prime minister last week with the support of the 120 lawmakers of the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) and the mainly ethnic Turkish Movement for Rights and Freedoms. All 97 representatives of the previously ruling centre-right party GERB voted against him, while the deputies from the ultranationalist Ataka (Attack) party, which holds 23 seats in Bulgaria's 240-seat assembly, did not participate in the vote. 
"The country is in a deep institutional crisis, continuing economic depression and worsening disintegration of society," Oresharski, a 53-year-old technocrat, told lawmakers ahead of the vote, as he presented the other 16 cabinet nominees and the government's priorities. 
The Balkan nation, he said, needs "maximum public consensus on the necessary urgent measures for stabilisation, economic recovery, strengthening of the institutions and more solidarity in a society shaken by despair and lack of prospects." 
The composition and structure of Oresharski's government, including a new ministry of investment planning, was approved in a separate 119-98 vote. 
The cabinet was appointed more than two weeks after Bulgaria's May 12th inconclusive early parliamentary elections. The snap poll was prompted by the resignation of former Prime Minister Boyko Borisov's cabinet in late February following month-long nationwide protests against austerity, corruption and monopolies. 
The new prime minister has outlined three priority areas of action for the new cabinet: strengthening democracy and statehood; economic recovery and promoting entrepreneurship; and more solidarity and social justice. 
Oresharski submitted a 15-page document, listing the stabilisation measures that need to be taken urgently to address the problems of citizens and businesses, and to strengthen statehood. He told lawmakers that a detailed programme will be drafted by his cabinet in the coming weeks. 
The main message of what has been dubbed as the Oresharski Plan is that the government "will seek continued macro-economic stability, which includes budget balance and a prudent spending increase," Georgi Stoev, head of Sofia-based consulting company Industry Watch, told SETimes. 
The programme also indicates that the prime minister is considering restructuring government spending to meet a broader range of social needs, Stoev said. 
"I would not interpret this as a signal for a spending increase per se, but rather for a change in the way of allocating available resources," Stoev noted. 
One of the measures suggested that the government will try to prevent "a new increase of power prices before the pricing methods has been thoroughly reviewed and revised." The government is also promising changes to the pricing policy for medicines, as well as an expansion of the system of energy assistance for the country's poor. 
Unemployment, which has more than doubled in recent years, is one of the key issues facing the country. The new government will focus on "expansion the effective measures on the labour market and create new jobs for temporary employment to mitigate the effects of rising unemployment." 
In the absence of any specifics as to how the cabinet will proceed in dealing with the identified issues, the measures sounded like a statement of intentions, Petar Ganev, senior economist at the Sofia-based Institute for Market Economics think tank, told SETimes. 
"The intention to ease the business environment sounds good, but one cannot comment on specific measures that have not been spelled out," the economist said. 
What can the new government do to ensure financial stability for the country? Tell us what you think below. 
