17/01/2007
(FT, Irish Times, Washington Times, Blic - 17/01/07; AFP, AP, DPA, RFE/RL, ANA-MPA, Interfax, RIA Novosti, Beta, B92 - 16/01/07)
Brussels has agreed to a Russian proposal for a new set of status talks between Belgrade and Pristina, the AFP reported on Tuesday (January 16th). The round would likely be initiated in March. 
Citing unnamed officials, the news agency said the EU wants more time to be given for discussions, to avoid a possible Russian veto when the Security Council votes on Kosovo's final status. 
"It is important to be as inclusive as possible with Russia -- although that does not necessarily mean as comprehensive as possible -- but we are concerned that it be consulted, that it be in agreement," an EU diplomat told the AFP, speaking on condition of anonymity. 
Russia is one of the five permanent members of the 15-nation Security Council. On Monday, Russian President Vladimir Putin made it clear that his country would block any decision on Kosovo's final status that is not acceptable to Belgrade. 
Emphasising its opposition to any imposed solution, Moscow also has backed Serbian authorities who say further talks are needed, in order to reach a compromise. 
"A solution can be reached only at talks, and it should be acceptable Kosovo authorities, Kosovo residents and Belgrade," Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov said at a news conference Tuesday in Moscow. "There can be no forced solution of the Kosovo status issue." 
Similar comments came from Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis, who visited Belgrade on Tuesday. Greece supports "a solution that will be acceptable" to both Belgrade and Pristina," he said. "It is important that both sides find the best solution." 
Direct talks between Kosovo Albanian and Serbian negotiating teams, sponsored by UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari and chaired by his deputy, Albert Rohan, began in Vienna in February 2006. However, the process was called off in October. 
After about eight months of negotiations, Belgrade and Pristina remained far apart in their positions on status, as well as on decentralisation, cultural heritage and other issues. 
With the Vienna talks failing to yield an agreement, Ahtisaari was asked in November to draw up a blueprint for Kosovo's future. The former Finnish president is expected to present his plan to the six-nation Contact Group -- consisting of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States -- following Serbia's parliamentary elections on Sunday. Ahtisaari is expected to recommend a form of supervised independence for Kosovo. 
To become an internationally accepted settlement, however, the plan will have to be approved by the Security Council. 
Speaking in Pristina on Tuesday, Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku insisted there would be no more negotiations on status. He said that Pristina would wait for the Ahtisaari's proposal and would try to reconcile it with the will of the Kosovo people. 
Serbia has no reason to oppose to Kosovo's independence because this solution would produce stability, Ceku said. He added that Kosovo institutions have demonstrated their will to guarantee the rights, dignity and security of Serbs in the province. 
