17/03/2008
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 17/03/08
 Southeast European Times: Mr. President, do you expect a turbulent period for the region after Kosovo’s independence? 
 Branko Crvenkovski: The declaration of Kosovo's independence undoubtedly poses some risks. The fact that neither Serbia nor the Serbian population in Kosovo as well as a number of countries throughout the world agree with such an act speaks of a period of serious challenges we are facing. 
 In my opinion, the key issue is in the way things will move in the northern part of Kosovo, where the majority Serbian population lives. If an effective presence of international structures and the new Kosovo authorities is not established in that part we could likely bear witness to a so called "soft division" of Kosovo, which could be a constant generator of instability within Kosovo itself as well as an encouragement for new ethnic distinctions in the region. 
 Setimes: How could independence affect Macedonia and its relations with Serbia? Do you expect economic or other sorts of blockades? 
 Crvenkovski: The Republic of Macedonia has not defined its final relation to Kosovo's independence yet. We are still holding to our position that as a candidate for the EU and NATO membership we will follow the common policy of these structures on this issue. However, of course, the final decision and the time it will be made mostly depends on assessments for protection of our national and state interests. 
As an immediate neighbour, we are determined to build equally good relations with both Belgrade and Pristina. It does not only depend on us but our neighbours' conduct whether we will manage to do that. 
 Setimes: Do you expect Macedonia to be given an invitation at the Bucharest Summit and how will this influence the security situation in the region? Additionally, do you expect changes in the economic situation in the country? 
 Crvenkovski:The Republic of Macedonia has fulfilled all necessary criteria in order to obtain a NATO invitation. Without doubt, our accession to the Alliance as well as accession of the other two Adriatic Charter countries -- Albania and Croatia -- will contribute much to further stabilising the region. This has additional weight given Kosovo's declaration of independence and the risks derived from it. Any additional assurances on politics and security stability -- and NATO membership offers such assurances -- is a strong impetus for an influx of new investment and economic development. 
 Setimes: Is the name dispute between Macedonia and Greece an obstacle to Macedonia's acceptance in NATO? 
 Crvenkovski: The name dispute between Macedonia and Greece is a bilateral dispute which in no way belongs to the criteria for membership, and in principle, it should not be an obstacle to our NATO integration. Unfortunatelly, Greece as a full member of the Alliance, threatens to use its veto. In such a way, it tries to impose its individual interest over the Alliance's interest in exchange for and at the expense of regional stability. 
 Setimes:What will happen if the veto is still used? You and the government have a joint stance – if the choice comes down to the name or an NATO invitation, Macedonia must choose its name. 
 Crvenkovski: Frankly, I am hopeful this will not happen. The Republic of Macedonia is sincerely and strongly committed to becoming a NATO member. In the past years we have worked with dedication to achieving that goal and we deserve the invitation. It is neither just nor in the spirit of the basic values which the Alliance rests upon to require us to pay for the membership by relinquishing our own national and cultural identity. 
 Setimes: You have visited Macedonian peacekeepers in Iraq. What was the experience and how much does Macedonia gain from its contribution to these peacekeeping missions? 
 Crvenkovski: Macedonian soldiers are taking part in military missions in Iraq, Afghanistan, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Lebanon. In this way, we are already behaving as a full and responsible NATO member and making our contribution to peace operations worldwide. 
The Macedonian Army gives much more than it gets from such arrangements but we are fully aware of our part of responsibility and willing to face such challenge. 
 Setimes: Are you satisfied with the co-habitation with the government? 
 Crvenkovski: When it comes to key issues for the Republic of Macedonia I and the government have satisfactory co-operation and harmonised positions. 
Certainly, cohabitation could and should be elevated to a higher level, but it is something that I would not like to speak specifically about in this period. 
 Setimes: How far is Macedonia on its way to full membership in the EU? Are you satisfied with the pace of the reforms? 
 Crvenkovski: It is our goal to fulfill all necessary preconditions in 2008 in order to be given a date for the start of accession negotiations as well as to fully and successfully complete the dialogue on liberalisation of the visa regime. 
 Realistically, those are achievable goals. I am just sorry that, because of our own weaknesses, we did not achieve them last year. 
 I am confident that reforms will intensify in the following few months. 
 Setimes: Do you expect Macedonia to receive a negotiation date by the end of the year? 
 Crvenkovski: The Republic of Macedonia has both institutional capacity and democratic potential and, more important, a strong determination to get a negotiation date by the end of 2008. 
 Setimes: Recently, the US ambassador recalled the need to complete implementation of the May agreement signed between the government and the Democratic Union of Integration (DUI). Do you support implementation of this agreement? 
 Crvenkovski: Agreements are concluded to be implemented. Otherwise, if one runs away from obligations undertaken, the sense of the political dialogue is lost. I am hopeful that the parties that concluded the May agreement, in this case Prime Minister Gruevski and the leader of the DUI, Ali Ahmeti, are fully aware of this. 
 Setimes:You often travel to countries in the region. What is your opinion about co-operation of the countries in the Balkans and how much, in your view, it is important? 
 Crvenkovski:Regional co-operation is of key importance. I am happy with the fact that in this respect, the situation today is incomparably better than ten years ago. 
The region is facing a new historical chance. Political elites that give precedence to co-operation over confrontation are leading the countries. And all of them are committed to the same democratic values and common European prospects. That must be utilised. 
