17/08/2006
Analysis by Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 17/08/06
Montenegrin independence has given a boost to the capital market in Europe's newest state. One day after the independence referendum was held, stock prices of large corporations and funds sky rocketed, and the Moste index reached 6.4 per cent, its highest level this year of. Eurofond was the leader with a 34 per cent increase. 
The Montenegrin market has proven especially attractive to investors in two other former Yugoslav republics, Croatia and Slovenia. Slovenian investors now account for one-fourth of investments -- 200m euros worth -- in Montenegro via the capital market. Meanwhile, Croatians have also demonstrated interest, and their presence is expected to increase. 
Convenience is one of Montenegro's assets. A company with limited liability can be founded in four days for 1 euro, an investment fund company needs basic capital of 500,000 euros, and a bank needs 5m euros to start up. 
The republic's newly acquired sovereignty should be a positive motivator and encourage investors, says Robert Znidar, an adviser to Slovenia's Gorenje Stock Market-Brokerage Association (GBD). The GBD has invested in several companies with high capitalisation, such as Elektroprivreda, Plantaze, Port of Bar and Adriatic Shipyard, as well as in privatisation funds. 
An overall upswing in the capital market can be expected, Znidar predicts. The establishment of a capital market, initially intended to help facilitate the mass voucher privatisation programme, is the largest reform step undertaken so far in Montenegro. More than half of the population monitors the fluctuation of prices at the stock exchange daily and many are even mortgaging their houses and applying for credits in order to invest in shares. Ways of earning income in Montenegro have been completely transformed, says Montenegrin Securities Commission President Zoran Djikanovic. 
There are four formal institutions in the Montenegrin capital market: the Central Depository Agency, the two stock exchanges and the Montenegro Securities and Exchange Commission. Of the exchanges, the Montenegrin Stock Exchange is primarily owned by state companies, whereas NEX Montenegro is largely private. 
The total market capitalisation of Montenegrin stock markets amounts to 81 per cent of Montenegro's GDP, which stands at 1.35 billion euros – making it the most open capital market in the region. In a year's time the stocks of Elektroprivreda increased by more than 15 times, the Port of Bar's 9.5 times and those of Budvanska Rivijera almost 6 times. Considering the relationship between the market turnover and GDP, Montenegro is closely following Croatia. Excluding privatisation transactions, the turnover with respect to GDP is 12.2 per cent. 
According to Djikanovic, Montenegro enjoys a favourable investment environment, with attractive tax rates and free transfer of capital. Current laws do not impose limits on the flow of capital into and out of the country. There are no restrictions for either residents or non-residents. Capital is not taxed as long as it is in business. 
Montenegro has the lowest corporate income tax in the region, at 9 per cent. The capital gains tax from sale of securities for legal entities and physical persons is 15 per cent. But capital gains from the sale of securities, if reinvested within 12 months in the purchase of new securities, are not included in the taxable base. 
