09/11/2006
(Sofia Echo - 09/11/06; Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik, Europe.bg - 08/11/06; Focus News Agency - 02/11/06; AFP, Sofia News Agency - 01/11/06; Focus News Agency, Sofia News Agency - 19/10/06)
The EU should show greater flexibility concerning the deadline for the closure of units 3 and 4 at the Kozloduy nuclear power plant, Bulgarian media said on Wednesday (November 8th), citing a draft report by the European Parliament's (EP) rapporteur for the country, Geoffrey van Orden. 
During its accession talks with the EU, Bulgaria agreed to shut down the two Soviet-era 440-megawatt reactors before its scheduled entry into the Union on January 1st, 2007. After the closure of units 1 and 2 in 2002 and the upcoming closure of units 3 and 4, Kozloduy's last two -- more modern 1,000-megawatt reactors -- will remain in operation. 
Earlier this month, Bulgarian Economy and Energy Minister Rumen Ovcharov alerted the European Commission (EC) about an earlier than planned reduction in the country's electricity exports due to coal supply problems. 
"We are reducing the supply of electricity to the region to ensure home consumption and this will inevitably create problems for the countries in the region," the minister said on November 1st. 
It is extremely important for Bulgaria to ensure that it has enough energy supplies to meet both domestic and regional needs, van Orden is quoted as saying in his draft report, while adding that safety is a top priority and should not be compromised. 
His appeal is not the first. European Parliament members Romana Jordan Cizelj of Slovenia and Edit Herczog of Hungary made a similar request last month, citing the need to ensure regional stability. They suggested that the December 31st deadline for the closure of units 3 and 4 be extended until the end of August 2007. 
"Bulgaria currently exports electricity to every neighbour," the parliamentarians said, "Even allowing for limited replacement generation by highly polluting lignite plants, power cuts in the region are certain." 
Besides the Kozloduy issue, van Orden's report is also said to urge Bulgaria to implement the requirements outlined in the EC's September 26th monitoring report, to avoid the activation of safeguard clauses. The Sofia-based daily Dnevnik quotes the document as calling on Sofia to show tangible results in the fight against organised crime and corruption, and to ensure maximum transparency in the process of privatization, in the appointments of officials in public administration and in the judiciary. 
In addition, the EU needs assurances that Bulgaria can guarantee the funding it receives from the bloc will be properly absorbed and that Bulgarians will have easy access to this money, the Sofia News Agency quotes the draft report as saying. 
