11/05/2011
(Sega, Trud, 24 Chasa, FOCUS News Agency - 11/05/11; European Court of Human Rights, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Trud - 10/05/11)
Bulgaria must adopt legal changes to introduce compensatory remedies for the victims of protracted civil, administrative and criminal proceedings, the European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) said in a judgment Tuesday (May 10th). 
Citing the absence of such a mechanism as a "systemic problem" in the nation's justice system, judges at the Strasbourg-based court said the authorities in Sofia must deal with the issue within a 12-month period after their ruling becomes final. 
Bulgaria has the right to request that the case be referred to the ECHR Grand Chamber within the next three months, which will then have to decide whether further examination is needed. If the appeal is rejected, Tuesday's judgment will enter into force immediately. Otherwise, the Grand Chamber will hear the case again and then issue a final ruling. 
The demand came in the ECHR's first "pilot-judgment" against Bulgaria. The court has been using this instrument for dealing with large groups of identical cases stemming from the same underlying problem. 
Announcing its decision, the court said that there were "around 700" cases against Bulgaria deriving from the same problem of excessive length of court proceedings that were awaiting examination by judges in Strasbourg. 
According to the ECHR, "those statistics indicated that there was a systemic problem concerning criminal and civil proceedings in Bulgaria." 
It announced its first pilot-judgment against the Balkan nation along with a seven-judge panel's rulings on two such cases -- Dimitrov and Hamanov vs Bulgaria and Finger vs Bulgaria. 
Stoyan Dimitrov and Nikolay Hamanov filed complaints at the ECHR over protracted criminal proceedings against them. 
Dimitrov was arrested in September 1995 while trying to break into a car along with two others, according to the ECHR. It was more than nine years before the investigator recommended that he be brought for trial. 
A criminal probe was opened against Hamanov, a bank manager, and several others over a number of financial transactions in March 1996. The proceedings against him lasted five years and three months. 
Maria Finger, a Bulgarian national who lives in Germany, filed a complaint with the ECHR over civil proceedings concerning the division of property in her home country that lasted nine years and ten months. 
In both cases, the European Court said on Tuesday, there had been "a violation of Article 6, section 1 (right to a fair trial within a reasonable time) of the European Convention on Human Rights; and a violation of Article 13 (right to an effective remedy) of the Convention". 
Under the ECHR's rulings, Bulgaria must pay 6,400 euros to Dimitrov, 600 euros to Hamanov and 1,200 euros to Finger, in respect of non-pecuniary damage. Aside from that, it must also pay Dimitrov 2,723 euros and over 3,300 euros to Finger, in respect of costs and expenses. 
Bulgaria claims that the problems leading to lengthy judicial proceedings have been resolved through new laws and organisational measures. 
