17/12/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 17/12/04
The Serbian legislature on Tuesday (14 December) adopted a law concerning the authority of state bodies in proceedings against war crimes indictees. The government, which proposed the legislation, hopes it will encourage the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) to hand over a number of cases to Serbian courts. 
The new law introduces two major changes to the domestic judicial system. It allows evidence presented before the ICTY to be used in Serbian courts, and provides for granting witnesses full protection if they come to Serbia to testify. Witnesses will also be granted a sort of immunity from prosecution in Serbia. The law guarantees the right of ICTY representatives to attend all phases of proceedings, and to be kept up to date on their progress. 
Serbian Justice Minister Zoran Stojkovic said he believed the new law would lift major obstacles to the takeover of cases from the ICTY. Under the UN court's exit strategy, he noted, the tribunal could transfer to Serbia all processes currently in the investigative and evidence-gathering phases. Stojkovic also said he expected "a number of cases in which indictments have already been raised to be returned," voicing confidence that the Serbian judiciary can hold trials in accordance with all international standards. 
Serbian officials have declined to say which particular cases they expect from the ICTY. Deputy Justice Minister Branislav Bjelica said that the first might be handed over in early 2005. "I cannot guess which cases will be given to our courts," he said, while adding that the logical first choice would be the indictment against three former Yugoslav People's Army officers for war crimes in Vukovar in 1991. 
Overshadowing the process, however, is the unresolved issue of Belgrade's insufficient co-operation with the tribunal. In her regular report to the UN Security Council in late November, war crimes chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte sharply criticised Serbian authorities for failing to arrest and extradite indictees -- at least 12 of whom, she said, are hiding in the republic. 
The government of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica was demonstrating "a defiant attitude towards the tribunal -- which also challenges the Security Council," del Ponte charged. 
 As a result of Belgrade's lax co-operation, Washington no longer backs the processing of war crimes cases in Serbian courts, US Ambassador for War Crimes Issues Pierre-Richard Prosper said following del Ponte's report. 
Currently, Serbia's war crimes department is trying lesser-known individuals charged with the murder of Croatian captives near Vukovar in November 1991. Three high-level indictees in the case -- Veselin Sljivancanin, Miroslav Radic, and Mile Mrksic -- are on trial in The Hague. 
In another case, the Belgrade District Court sentenced Sasa Cvjetan to 40 years in prison earlier this year for the murder of Albanian civilians during the 1999 Kosovo conflict. 
