19/06/2006
(Blic - 19/06/06; AFP, FT, AP - 18/06/06; Reuters, AFP, UPI, EUobserver, Beta, Radio B92 - 16/06/06)
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica criticised the EU on Sunday (18 June) for its policy towards his country. The "permanent setting of conditions … is deeply wrong and so far has produced exclusively negative effects," he said in an interview with the Fonet News Agency. 
Almost six years after the democratic overthrow of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's regime in October 2000, the EU opened talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Serbia last year. But the process was put on hold in early May after Belgrade failed to hand over former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
"We believed that a period of partnership relations with EU had come" after Milosevic's ousting, Kostunica said. "That means one neither sets conditions nor puts pressure on a partner but co-operates with him and commonly determines criteria needed to be fulfilled." 
His remarks came two days after the EU summit in Brussels, at which leaders of the 25-nation bloc reaffirmed their support for Serbia's integration into mainstream Europe. 
"A peaceful and prosperous Serbia fully integrated into the family of European nations is very important for the stability in the region," the EU leaders said in the summit's conclusions on Friday. 
They also assured Belgrade that the talks would resume once it shows full co-operation with the ICTY and hands over all war crimes suspect sought by the Hague-based court. 
During last week's summit in Brussels, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn reportedly proposed a plan to help Serbia meet its obligations to the ICTY. According to the Financial Times, he has also advocated expanding trade and economic ties between the EU and Serbia before the SAA talks are resumed. 
There are concerns among some in the West that the suspension of the EU talks, Montenegro's recent secession from its loose union with Serbia and the likelihood of Kosovo also gaining independence could lead to Serbia's radicalisation. With support for the Serbian Radical Party running at 40 per cent, according to a recent poll, a new election could see the ultranationalist party come to power. 
"There is a willingness to look for practical ways to assist Serbia," Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, said Friday. "We are expecting very clearly from Serbia to engage in reforms and to strengthen efforts for full co-operation with the ICTY." 
Meanwhile, Rasim Ljajic, the head of Serbia's committee on co-operation with the ICTY, told the AP on Saturday that Mladic had been hiding mainly in Serbia until last year. 
"All the locations where he was staying have been discovered," Ljajic said. "The facts show that in the period between 1997 and 2005, he was mostly in Serbia." Authorities do not know where he is now, Ljajic added. 
