02/12/2004
By Davor Konjukusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 02/12/04
After months of speculation, Serbian Minister of Education Slobodan Vuksanovic has unveiled important changes to the republic's education laws, continuing a reform process that was initiated by his predecessor, Gaso Knezevic. 
"The new Law on Higher Education will introduce European standards into the curricula of faculties and into the assessment of students, as provided by the Bologna Convention," Vuksanovic said after meetings with the rectors of state universities. Agreement on a final version of the law will be reached in consultation with institutions of higher learning, he said, as they best understand their own needs. 
"As someone who has supported the idea for the writing of laws to be moved beyond the closed doors of the ministry, I think that it is very important that this job has been handed over to rectors," says Srbijanka Turajlic, the former higher education adviser to the minister. "The Academic Association of Serbia chose these rectors with full awareness that reforms and a new law are expected. Therefore, they received the mandate from the Academic Association to take us into reforms. What they do will determine the future of education in Serbia." 
Nikola Varagic, an advanced university student at the Faculty of Philology in Belgrade, is among the students who are not satisfied with what their faculty has provided so far. He says that during four years of university studies he acquired considerable theoretical knowledge, with very few practical skills. 
"Study tours, student exchanges, everything that is sorely needed by students studying French or English, for instance, or Spanish, Italian, Portuguese … do not exist," Varagic says, adding that he and fellow students have been waiting for the Serbian system to be brought into line with the Bologna Declaration. 
In the meantime, University of Belgrade Rector Dejan Popovic has announced that exams will be ranked according to the system that exists in the majority of European countries, and that regular controlling of curricula and the performance of professors will be introduced. 
"Before everything else, it is necessary to introduce a quality control system for academic institutions, which leads to resultant aspects of accreditation of evaluation. These are the issues this law is supposed to regulate. However, only once it is adopted, the considerable task of its application will begin," Popovic says. 
