15/03/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb– 15/03/07
The trial against three Croatian generals indicted for their role in war crimes during 1995's Operation Storm is set to begin on May 7th at the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague. The indictees -- Ante Gotovina, Mladen Markac and Ivan Cermak -- attended a status conference in early February and have appeared together in court for the first time. Gotovina was arrested in Spain in 2005, while Cermak and Markac surrendered in March 2004. 
The three stand accused of taking part in a "joint criminal enterprise" with the intention of persecuting local Serbs. The charges are based on their command responsibility. The authorities in Croatia have objected to the indictment, terming it biased and flawed, while at the same time attempting to gain "friend of the court" status. 
The trial has garnered much media attention, not only because these are the highest-ranking Croatian military officials to have appeared at The Hague, but also because of the defence team. 
 Markac's lawyer, Miroslav Separovic, is a former justice minister who was serving in the government during Operation Storm. Both in Zagreb and at The Hague, many are debating whether he should resign from the defence team, since a conflict of interest could emerge. But Separovic has declined to do so, saying it would damage his client. 
Gotovina's defence lawyer is a former prosecutor at The Hague, Gregory Kehoe, who switched sides a couple of months ago. During the status conference, he voiced complaints about the work of the prosecutors' office, saying he had not received pre-trial evidence and that the failure to provide it makes crafting a defence strategy more difficult. 
Meanwhile, one of the defendants, Cermak, faced tough questions during the status conference. The chamber demanded that he clarify his actions after being released provisionally in 2004 along with Markac. 
Cermak failed to comply with requirements that he stay out of the public eye. Photographers from the Croatian weekly Globus caught him at various public events and celebrations that he was barred from attending while under provisional release. 
When the pictures were published, the tribunal reacted quickly and decisively. It suspended the provisional release of both Cermak and Markac, demanding that Croatian authorities transfer them immediately to The Hague. Since then, the court has ruled that Markac can still enjoy his provisional freedom as he did not break the rules, while Cermak remains at the Scheveningen detention unit. 
