13/04/2006
By Marina Stojanivska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 13/04/06
Macedonian Foreign Minister Ilinka Mitreva kicked off a two-day visit to EU headquarters in Brussels on Tuesday (11 April), where she met with EU security chief Javier Solana and Commissioner for Justice, Freedom and Security Franco Frattini. The talks focused, among other issues, on easing visa restrictions for Macedonian citizens. 
Last month, Macedonia became the first country in the Western Balkans to hold concrete talks with Brussels on relaxing the requirements, especially for students, teachers, researchers and businesspeople. 
"A dialogue that should result in liberalising the visa regime for a certain category of citizens has already started," said foreign ministry official Emil Kirijas. "The process will continue and we will keep on fulfilling our obligations more intensively." 
To address EU worries about a mass flow of people into the bloc's member states, Macedonia is issuing new biometric passports, negotiating readmission agreements with EU member states, and enhancing border control. 
According to Interior Minister Ljubomir Mihajlovski, preparatory work for computer networking at the border crossings is nearly complete. As for readmission agreements, he said, Macedonia has signed such agreements with seven EU member states. The foreign ministry says deals with the remaining 18 union members are in the works. 
"Preparation for issuance of the new biometric passports -- that will be in full compliance with the European standards -- is also under way," Mihajlovski said, adding that the first such passports will be issued in November. 
Although the European Commission (EC) has listed visa regime relaxation as one of the items on its agenda for the Western Balkans, officials this week stressed that the process is not going to happen overnight. 
"There must be concrete results by Macedonia on these issues in order to move on visa facilitations," a report by DTT-net quoted Frattini's spokesman as saying after Wednesday's meeting with Mitreva. In March, EC President Jose Manuel Barroso wrote to Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski, cautioning that "to bring this issue forward, it is essential that further progress is made on reform, particularly in the area of rule of law", the report said. 
