24/01/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 24/01/12
Rising electricity and fuel costs are triggering demonstrations in Montenegro. 
A liter of diesel now costs 1.42 euros in Podgorica, while a liter of unleaded gasoline costs 1.39 euros -- an increase of 10 cents per liter since January 17th. Electricity prices are up 6.7% this month. The average monthly salary in Montenegro is 475 euros. 
Thousands protested on Saturday (January 21st), demanding a reversal of the decision to increase power prices. But authorities say that there is no way to reduce them. 
Pero Vuckovic, deputy director of the Agency for Energetics of Montenegro (RAE) -- the state institution that sets the price of electricity -- said that the country's sole electric company, Elektroprivreda, originally requested an increase of 15%, but was granted only 6.7%. 
"Electricity prices have steadily declined over the last three years. This is the first increase in three years -- and it will increase bills no more than 2 euros per month," Vuckovic told SETimes. 
The protests, which reportedly drew up to 10,000 people, were organised by the Labour Union, the Student Union and the Network for Affirmation of the Civil Sector. 
Srdja Kekovic, president of the Labour Union of Montenegro, told SETimes that the electricity price hike was only a trigger that sparked the protests, and that most participants are rallying against the generally poor conditions in the country. 
"The biggest losers of the Montenegrin transition, which lasted 20 years, are Montenegrin citizens. Our demand is clear -- the government must reset the decision on [raising] electricity prices. If this does not happen, we will organise more and more protests until the government annuls the decision," he said. 
He pointed out that the government can find solutions if it wants. "Let us [look at the recent] number of privatisations in which the foreign partners were given hundreds of millions of euros in state aid," Kekovic said. 
Another demonstrator, Podgorica resident Milena Vukeljic, 27, told SETimes "I'm not protesting today because of the politicians or tycoons or bills for electricity. I'm protesting for myself. People are vulnerable now, and the government must react." She added that only pressure from the public can effect change. 
Asked about any future price hikes, Vuckovic said, "Electricity is a commodity like any other. Some corrections can be expected in the long term, but it should not be drastic." 
"We will continue the dialogue with our social partners -- trade unions, employers -- and will help with subsidies for the most vulnerable [citizens] to pay the electricity bills," Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare spokesperson Tatjana Radulovic told SETimes. 
She added that the government has formed a working group to analyse the effect of increasing electricity prices on the current standard of living. 
Overall, the economy of Montenegro is in trouble. At 1.25 billion euros, or 45% of GDP, Montenegro's projected total debt is second only to Albania in the region. Public debt rapidly increased after the government issued 380m euros in bonds a year ago in order to pay salaries and pensions. 
