30/04/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 30/04/09
Anxious Turks find the global crisis sharply reducing demand for their country's products and their once-lively economy beginning to shrivel. Unemployment hit a record high of 15.5% in January, skyrocketing by 3.9 percentage points in a single year. Youth unemployment is now 27.9%. Though no banks have collapsed, experts are debating how the government can best respond. 
Critics blame the government for reacting slowly to the worsening economic situation. Ahead of the March 29th local elections, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan expressed confidence that the global crisis would "barely touch" Turkey. The government has not yet concluded a deal with the IMF, though negotiations are ongoing. 
Now, with things looking ominous, Ankara is enacting several stimulus measures: temporary hiring in the public sector, job training for 300,000 unemployed and various tax reductions to boost consumption. 
Critics describe the new measures as "too little, too late". Economists Seyfettin Gursel and Mehmet Alper Dincer of Istanbul's Bahcesehir University predict the ranks of the jobless in the nation of nearly 72 million will swell to 4.6 million by the end of 2011. 
The crunch comes as more young people enter the labour force every year than the economy can absorb. From December 2007 to December 2008, 528,000 men and 500,000 women entered a workforce that had only 410,000 new jobs waiting for them. 
Meanwhile, demand for Turkish exports (textiles, chemicals and auto parts, for example) has plunged -- falling by 35% in March from one year ago. That decline can mean only more layoffs. 
Analysts are heatedly debating the correct path for the economy, still one of the world's 20 largest. Some, like columnist Mustafa Sonmez of the daily Cumhuriyet, think pro-EU neo-liberal policies have failed and call for instituting a more government-directed economic model. 
Others, like Gursel, argue Turkey needs a laissez-faire "South European democratic model" rather than a statist "Asian authoritarian" one. They point to the rapid growth of the Turkish economy between 2002 and 2007 and its deceleration as EU-demanded reforms stalled and domestic political turmoil increased. 
Their opponents, though, argue that such growth was an artefact of a worldwide bubble rather than the fruit of enlightened policy. 
