15/08/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 15/08/06
Summer is an ideal time to enjoy music or theatre performances. In Croatia, an array of annual festivals makes this possible and contributes to the country's growing reputation as an attractive tourist destination. 
Among the most famous Croatian summer festivals is the Dubrovnik Summer Games -- founded in the 1950s, when many theaters and musical happenings were launched across Europe. The festival, which began on 10 July and runs through 25 August this year, highlights Dubrovnik's renaissance and baroque ambience, featuring the town's theatre and musical heritage. Every year, plays by famous Croatian and European authors are performed on open-air stages. 
Shakespeare's "Hamlet" is being performed at Fort Lovrjenac, an ideal setting for this story of public intrigue and inner torment. Other plays being staged in the city's historic centre include Goethe's "Iphigenia" and Vojnovic's "Dubrovnik trilogy". Renaissance comedies are being performed in the city square. 
In nearby Split, the summer festival opened on 14 July and ran through 14 August. Founded in 1954, the festival is a traditional summer gala that included opera, drama and dance performances in old, picturesque areas of Split, often for only the price of a daily newspaper. 
The trademark of another Croatian city, Sibenik, is the International Children's Festival. It initiates and supports various genres of art for children: drama, puppetry, music, film and literature. The entire city becomes one large playground, full of imagination, play and illusion. The festival is supported by UNICEF and UNESCO, and was held this year from 18 June through 2 July. 
Zadar's Music Nights in St. Donat is being held for the 46th time this year. Established in 1961 by group of citizens, it is the most important event in Zadar. Its name comes from the city's most prominent monument, the Church of St. Donat. The festival concept is similar to that in Dubrovnik and Split -- the sound of music flows through squares, parks, gardens and sea promenades. 
One of the most prestigious film festivals held in the region is the Pula Film Festival, held on Istria. This year, the 53rd festival was held from 15-22 July. The films are traditionally screened in Vespasian's Amphitheatre, dating from the 1st century AD. The festival draws domestic and international tourists. 
A newer film festival is held in Motovun, a small picturesque countryside town close to Pula. The Motovun Film Festival, held from 24-28 July this year, was initiated five years ago and hosts about 1,000 visitors who camp and watch films under the open sky. It has an international character, and is very popular among moviemakers and actors. The focus is on independent films. 
