06/10/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 06/10/04
In a public address on state television RTS late Tuesday (5 October), Serbian President Boris Tadic called on Kosovo Serbs to participate in the province's upcoming parliamentary elections and become part of the democratic process. He also set a deadline for establishing internationally recognised home rule in Kosovo's Serb enclaves, saying this must happen within 90 days following the formation of the provisional government. Failing that, he said he would personally urge Kosovo Serb deputies to withdraw from parliament. 
Tadic wants to see Serb local authorities control the police, judiciary, health and education systems within the enclaves. "The only way to see these conditions met is to participate in the democratic process," he said. 
The Serbian president also sharply criticised the government of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica for its lack of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, warning that war crimes indictees must answer the tribunal's summons and face the charges against them. Serbia is a member of the UN and must fulfil its international obligations, Tadic said. On Monday, he promised visiting UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte that he would take action to bring fugitive indictees -- around 20 of whom are thought to be hiding in Serbia-Montenegro -- to justice. 
"Executive authorities cannot freely interpret the decisions of judicial authorities. Politicians cannot leave it up to indictees' own free will to act on court decisions," Tadic said, adding that the government should fulfil its legal duties for the sake of Serbia's stability and future. "If the government is not able to do this, it should face the consequences," he said. 
His remarks met with heavy opposition and criticism. "By inviting Serbs to take part in Kosovo elections, President Tadic has, unfortunately, disregarded the government's stance that minimum requirements for participation in the poll have not been met," said the Serbian government's media relations chief, Srdjan Djuric. 
With the exception of Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, all other political forces in Belgrade -- including G17 Plus, the Serbian Radical Party and the Socialist Party of Serbia -- have agreed with the government that conditions are not in place for Serb participation in the 23 October ballot. 
Speaking on behalf of G17 Plus, Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic said Kosovo Serbs are divided on the issue themselves. "It is not good for them to wait for Belgrade to pass judgment," he said. 
Tadic's speech came only days after US Ambassador for War Crimes Issues Pierre Richard Prosper and US Undersecretary of State Marc Grossman visited Belgrade. During talks with Serbian authorities, Grossman warned that all deadlines for co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal have expired. 
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, meanwhile, was in Belgrade on Tuesday. He acknowledged that conditions for Serbs in Kosovo were still "very difficult", but urged them to vote on 23 October to avoid isolation and to ensure a voice in running the province's institutions. 
