11/04/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 11/04/05
When it rains, only their rubber boots help them through the thick layer of mud that covers the streets. The water for drinking or washing comes from wells and, after usage, goes straight into the soil, as no sewage network is available in the area. In winter, wood stoves heat the houses. 
This picture of life in a remote rural area is also the norm for Bucharest's outskirts. Many of city's two million residents still live in nearly the same conditions as 100 years ago -- only electricity separates them from their ancestors. 
About one third of Bucharest's 5,300 streets lack at least one of the following: running water, a sewage system, natural gas network or asphalt. Bucharest's new mayor, Adriean Videanu, says he is going to change that. Videanu counts on dozens of projects his predecessor, Traian Basescu, prepared before leaving office to become president of Romania. 
"We have a project [that envisions] paving 1,850 secondary streets and expanding and modernising 300km of water pipes and 270km of sewage lines. It will cost about 475m euros -- most of the money will come through an external loan," Videanu said. The main roads will also be targeted -- and 60m euros will be spent for capital repairs this year. 
Since 1989, the number of cars registered in the city has increased fivefold. In order to make the nightmarish traffic more fluid, 21m euros will be invested in an automatic system of traffic management. The most congested crossroads will be controlled by specialists. Another 90m euros will be used to build a bridge over Bucharest's main railway and one big underground parking lot. 
Public transportation must change as well. Videanu promises to finish the rehabilitation of the tram lines and to buy 500 new buses. The road and underground infrastructure in the historical centre will also receive money. Authorities hope to transform a ruined area into a point of interest for tourists and investors by next year. 
