06/01/2006
(Bloomberg, Reuters, AP, AFP, BBC, CNN, The Guardian, Hurriyet - 06/01/06; UN News Centre, World Health Organisation, AFP, BBC, FT, Telegraph - 05/01/06)
International health experts will assist Turkish authorities as they try to stem a bird flu outbreak that on Friday (6 January) claimed the life of a third child. 
The death of 11-year-old Hulya Kocyigit follows those of her brother Mehmet Ali, 14, on Sunday and of her sister Fatma, 15, on Thursday. Officials at the hospital in the city of Van, some 800km east of Ankara, where the children were treated said Friday that a fourth sibling -- six-year-old Ali Hasan -- is seriously ill and breathing with the help of a respirator. 
The victims are from the rural district of Dogubayazit, in the eastern province of Agri, which borders Iran and Armenia. Late last month, cases of the virus’ deadly H5N1 strain were confirmed in chickens and ducks in the adjacent province of Igdir. 
Culling of birds is said to be under way across several eastern provinces, including in the Dogubayazit district, which has also been placed under quarantine with no people or animals allowed to move in or out. Additional supplies of the Tamiflu medicine used against the disease have been sent to Van. 
Huseyin Avni Sahin, the head physician at the Van hospital, told CNN Turk on Friday that 23 people were currently being treated at his hospital for suspected bird flu. Most of the patients are said to be children aged 6-15. 
Following Fatma's death on Thursday, a team of experts from WHO, the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and the European Commission (EC) was sent to Turkey to work with authorities in investigating the situation in the eastern part of the country. 
Samples from the teenagers killed by the flu have been sent for analysis to a British laboratory, which is expected to report within days if the virus is of the deadly H5N1 strain. 
"They died from H5, which is bird flu, but we do not know what strain they have died from and that's what we are hoping to find out when these tests will have been done in the coming days," EC spokesman Michael Mann told reporters Thursday. 
Scientists are concerned that while the deadly H5N1 bird flu virus remains hard for people to catch, outbreaks among poultry and human infections raise the chances of it mutating into a form that could be easily passed among humans. 
David Nabarro, the Senior UN System Co-ordinator for Avian and Human Influenza, stressed on Thursday that there has been no evidence so far to suggest that the deaths in Turkey are the result of human-to-human transmission. 
Turkish authorities, meanwhile, are seeking to allay public fears. "We don't expect the disease to contaminate a large number of people," said Health Minister Recep Akdag. "We don't expect a pandemic or anything like that in Turkey, but there is a real risk for people who are in close contact with fowl." 
Turkey reported its first cases of the H5N1 virus in poultry in mid-October. Other countries where the deadly strain has been also detected in recent months include Croatia, Romania and Russia. Those outbreaks have been attributed to contact between domestic poultry and migratory waterfowl. 
