31/01/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 31/01/11
Turkey received mediocre marks in two influential surveys covering democracy and human rights. The 2011 Freedom in the World report, by Freedom House, described the country as only "partly free", with low scores in terms of political rights and civil liberties. 
Human Rights Watch, meanwhile, took the country to task for what it said was a deterioration in freedom of expression. 
Authorities in Ankara are not impressed. "These kinds of reports are fake and irresponsible," says Salih Kapusuz, deputy leader of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's AKP party. 
"Turkey is getting more democratic and free from day to day," he told SETimes. "Within a very short time we went from being a country with torture cases and human rights violations to one with freedom and democracy." 
 "These kinds of topics are addressed during our negotiations with the EU and they see that we are approaching them," he added. 
 International human rights campaigners acknowledge there have been positive developments. "Turkey's current government had implemented a series of important reforms concerning the principle of rule of law, minority rights, relations with Kurds and administrative issues," said Freedom House Research Director Arch Puddington. 
Nevertheless, he added, there are still areas of concern. "Several developments that took place [in Turkey] last year caused alarm bells to ring at Freedom House", Puddington told SETimes. 
Ozturk Turkdogan, chairman of the Ankara-based Human Rights Association believes the situation is worsening day-by-day, especially with regard to Kurdish issues. 
He told SETimes that a number of ethnic Kurd politicians, local government officials and civil society members were arrested during 2010. 
"Even human-rights activists and NGO representatives, who are in no way related to violence, are being kept under arrest," Türkdoğan said, adding that their right to a fair trial had been violated. 
The government, he says, is sending a dire message: "don't ask for your rights". 
As for media freedom, journalist and activist Necati Abay says people in his profession faced scores of legal proceedings during 2010. 
"There are 43 journalists in prison right now, ten of whom are editors-in-chief who are getting very long prison terms," he told SETimes. 
Abay, who has himself been arrested a number of times on various charges, says the Turkish Penal Code and the Counterterrorism Law provide grounds for the authorities to go after reporters. 
But the government denies it. "Nobody is in prison in Turkey today for expressing their ideas," Kapusuz said, adding all arrests were the result of laws being broken, and not because journalists had spoken their mind. 
"We fixed the laws," he said. "Now Turkey is a country governed by legislation and no one has the right to break the law." 
