07/10/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 07/10/11
In office for eight months now, Justice Minister Hajredin Kuci faces the challenge of bringing Kosovo's judicial system up to international standards. He discusses the accomplishments so far – and the road ahead -- with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku. 
 SETimes: What are the problems facing the justice system in Kosovo? 
 Hajredin Kuci: Functionality of courts in northern Kosovo, the legal infrastructure and increasing the number of judges and prosecutors appear as major challenges for the justice system in Kosovo. You know that a judicial system is functional and effective only when it has spread throughout the territory. In this sense we are trying to [address] the courts in northern Kosovo, [make them] functional. 
We are making changes in the legal infrastructure to enable a higher degree of strength and independence of courts and prosecution office. In collaboration with international experts, we have amended the Criminal Code and we are finalising all the legislation in general, so that they reflect best practices and more sophisticated known international practices. 
 SETimes: Is there a shortage of judges and prosecutors? 
 Kuci: Of course there is, and the lack of judges and prosecutors is the biggest problem for the justice system. According to international standards, professional preparation of judges and prosecutors requires time and this (time) has a high cost for our justice system in terms of unsolved, collected, current court cases. For that, the Ministry of Justice has planned for next year the establishment of the Justice Academy, which will educate … candidates for judges, prosecutors, notaries, mediators. 
 SETimes: Is there political influence in the justice system? 
 Kuci: The Justice Ministry is committed to completing the legal infrastructure that will ensure the independence of the judiciary. The current legal infrastructure also ensures the independent functioning of the justice system, but we're trying to ensure a system that is totally operating throughout the territory of Kosovo, which would not allow different interpretations. 
 SETimes: What is the level of co-operation with EULEX? Is this a partnership-based co-operation? 
 Kuci: The relationship with EULEX is clearly defined and is functioning very well. Our co-operation consists of joint work regarding the judiciary, customs and police. Particularly in the judiciary, EULEX's role is complementary. In all these three areas, we are doing very valuable work that contributes to joint common goals [needed] to meet the criteria for European integration. We co-operate with EULEX at a partnership level, always bearing in mind our obligations and responsibilities that the legislation stipulates. 
 SETimes: Recent developments in the North have created a new situation. How do you see the solution? 
 Kuci: The government is determined to establish the rule of law in its northern part. The government bases this determination [on] the legal acts in force and international political support. This is a common objective that includes the dissolution of the parallel structures, functioning of the justice system and increasing the involvement of the Serbian community in Kosovo's institutional structures. 
The real obstacle remains the influence of Belgrade political structures in the Serb community in the North. I feel sorry (when I see) how a state manages to keep as hostage a part of the Serb community in Kosovo for manipulative purposes, thus depriving them of the chance to live a real life. In addition, many criminal structures have survived in the north due to this support. Therefore, Kosovo's government remains determined to make the survival of these structures in the north impossible. 
 SETimes: How do you see the introduction of northern Kosovo in the justice system? 
 Kuci: After taking office as Justice Minister in February this year, we established six priorities. One of them is that of our [commitment to] the full and unified implementation of laws throughout the territory of Kosovo. Re-functioning of the courts in North Mitrovica, Zvecan, Zubin Potok and Leposavic are justice ministry priorities, for which we are working intensively with EULEX. 
 SETimes: What is the position of Pristina regarding dialogue with Belgrade, which was suspended? Do you expect new signals from the visit of the mediator, Mr. Cooper? 
 Kuci: We participate actively in the dialogue; we will be a constructive part. We will also be careful in order that all the principles that we have as a country -- as well as requests of the democratic world -- are respected. We have no illusion that things will move very quickly, but we will be specific concerning our rights, in order that the solutions will be in the framework of our political objectives, limits, conditions that we have, and international standards. 
