19/04/2005
(Blic - 19/04/05; AFP, AP, BBC, EU, Transitions Online, Radio B92, Serbian Government Web Site - 18/04/05)
Six days after the European Commission (EC) adopted a positive feasibility study for Serbia-Montenegro, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn arrived in Belgrade on Monday (18 April) to meet with the country's leadership. His visit, which also includes talks with officials in Podgorica on Tuesday, precedes a meeting on 25 April, when the EU Council of Ministers is to decide whether to endorse the EC's positive finding. 
The study said Serbia-Montenegro had made sufficient progress to begin negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the Union, a major first step towards eventual EU membership. On Monday, Rehn said the talks would open in October. He warned, however, against complacency. 
"It is necessary to keep up the momentum in the reforms, especially in the judiciary and the fight against organised crime," the commissioner said after talks with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica. 
The EU has made full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) a key condition for the accession progress of countries involved in the Balkan conflicts of the 1990s. While commending Belgrade for steps taken over the past few months to improve relations with the UN court in The Hague, Rehn stressed the need for co-operation to continue until all indicted war criminals are brought to justice. 
Thirteen Serbian and Bosnian Serb war crimes suspects have been transferred to The Hague since October, in surrenders brokered by Kostunica's government. But nearly a dozen more remain at large, including the ICTY's two most wanted indictees, wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic. Former Yugoslav Army chief of staff Nebojsa Pavkovic, who is sought by the UN tribunal for alleged war crimes committed during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo, recently disappeared from Belgrade and his whereabouts are not publicly known. Mladic is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia with the help of the army and secret services. 
"All indictees must be extradited without unnecessary delays," Rehn said, warning that Brussels would not even consider starting accession talks unless there is full co-operation with the ICTY. He also stressed the need for Karadzic and Mladic to be brought to justice before the ten-year anniversary of the July 1995 Srebrenica massacre. 
Kostunica recently pledged that "Co-operation with The Hague tribunal will be fulfilled from A to Z." 
Describing the benefits of an SAA accord for citizens of Serbia-Montenegro, Rehn said these would include better conditions for trading and economic co-operation and improved dialogue between the state union and the EU. The agreement would also "pave the way for the easing of the visa regime, especially for students, researchers and other groups that have the need to travel throughout Europe". 
In comments prior to his departure for Belgrade, the commissioner said that under the best-case scenario, the talks on an SAA agreement would last a year. "The amount of progress that we are able to make all depends on Belgrade and Podgorica," he said. 
