06/03/2008
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 06/03/08
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Oscar-winning film director Danis Tanovic plans to establish a new political party to fight widespread corruption in the country. 
Tanovic's bittersweet anti-war movie "No Man's Land" won numerous awards, including the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film in 2001. 
The 38-year-old filmmaker stressed his desire to fight widespread apathy and corruption in BiH in an interview last month with the Sarajevo daily Oslobodjenje. 
Tanovic said he wants to change the perception that "nothing can be done" to improve life in BiH, which is in a slow transition from being a post-war state to becoming a candidate for EU membership. 
"Five months ago I returned to Sarajevo to live with my wife and kids, but too soon I found that a normal life is not possible here," he explained. 
 "I cannot accept the fact that children in kindergarten have been divided according to the religious identity of their parents in order to implement religious education, or that children have to wait for five months for a simple medical operation, or that some people sell their kidney in order to feed their family, or that some policemen flee crime scenes," he said. 
Tanovic added, "I am sick of reading our newspapers or watching TV because of daily proof of unscrupulous officials and criminals who are protected by them." 
Tanovic did not announce the name of his party, but he did say it would participate in October's local elections. The party's platform is still evolving, though the primary goal will be a better life for ordinary citizens. 
He stressed that his partners can be anyone who shares his principles and is active politically. 
"We will also support other parties' candidates in some regions where they proved they are working towards the general benefit," said Tanovic. "However, if some of the current ruling parties wish to co-operate with us, they will have to change radically," he added. 
Public reaction has generally been positive. Sarajevo weekly Dani chief manager Senad Pecanin said " For the first time, BiH is getting a leader who is not entering politics to become rich, famous and influential -- he is all of that, already." 
