17/03/2011
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 17/03/11
BiH companies have largely suspended work in Libya and other Arab countries due to the unrest in the Middle East. Analysts say the BiH economy stands to suffer a heavy blow as a result. 
"The value of the projects in Libya is over 1 billion euros. The majority of the companies have not collected their receivables, and a lot of equipment and materials remain in Libya, whereas around 1,000 workers returned. The situation is very uncertain -- nobody can control or predict what is going to happen in the future," Sarajevo University Economics Professor Muris Cicic told SETimes. 
Cicic said the biggest affected companies are holding meetings with the BiH Chamber of Commerce to form a strategy to deal with the crisis. 
But without a new government in place, efforts at the political level continue to stall. Those in a position to help, namely the country's politicians, seem largely uninclined to do so. 
An exception is BiH's Council of Ministers Chairman Nikola Spiric, who met last week with Libyan Ambassador Salem Finir to discuss outstanding debts, damages compensation for BiH companies, and other key issues. 
 But BiH's Chamber of Commerce analyst Igor Gavran explained debt collection may not account for much. "Any legal protection of this kind, even if perfectly contracted, requires a long time, and even when the debt is collected, it is usually not up to the level of the actual loss." 
Local media reports suggest that losses are so heavy that some companies may be on the verge of bankruptcy. 
 The most immediate -- and painful -- effect seems to be on the labour market. 
"The unemployment situation in BiH is such that it is a big deal even if ten people lose their jobs, let alone 1,000," economic analyst and former Republika Srpska Finance Minister Svetlana Cenic told local media. 
Company executives say they may reassign a few of the workers who returned from Libya to other jobs. But "companies can not do everything by themselves," Cicic said. 
Mujo Selimovic owns Mims Jafara, one of the "big four" companies that operates in Libya. He says he was forced to suspend all projects and evacuate all 100 workers from the company's food and juices production facility on the outskirts of Tripoli. 
 The move affects workers in the entire Mims Jafara complex, which includes an administrative building, warehouse, restaurant, sales room and a hotel. 
Sirbegovic construction, a company founded in northern Bosnia after the 1992-1995 conflict, has launched several construction projects in Libya. Together, they are worth about 100m euros. One project was to build the spacious tourist district in Libya's coastal town of Misurata, now a stronghold for rebels opposing Muammar Gaddafi's regime. 
 Owner and general director Faruk Sirbegovic said the current accounts payable from Libya amounts to 7m euros, in addition to 5m in equipment. In a statement to the media, Sirbegovic said the company is particularly concerned about the 800,000 euros needed to cover the workers' wages. 
 "Libya was the focus of Energoinvest and its major foreign market," says Dzemail Vlahovljak, executive director of the one-time Yugoslav giant. The company contracted work in Libya worth 150m euros. 
 An Energoinvest worker who wanted to remain anonymous tells SETimes that despite difficult conditions "we never missed work during any [natural] disaster. I wish the situation would calm down over there so we can continue working on our electricity lines." 
Another state-owned construction company, Hidrogradnja, could face heavy losses. It has been involved in Libya since 1967. When the unrest started, it had at least four construction projects in progress, including one to build water towers in the town of Aydabiya. 
Over 120 Hidrogradnja workers have been put on a "waiting list", and General Manager Semin Masic acknowledges this is tantamount to losing their jobs. "It all depends on whether Hidrogradnja will have future arrangements," he told BiH media. 
