10/12/2008
By Valentina Pop for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 10/12/08
"I don't know why there is no equal sign between communism and Nazism ... The Nazi criminals are in prisons, while the communist ones, who are maybe even guiltier, stay rich and free," "Ticu" Dumitrescu told Southeast European Times just a few months before his death. 
 After surviving 16 of the roughest political prisons, Dumitrescu became one of the country's most prominent figures to conceive laws and institutions for addressing its communist past. 
The author of the lustration law, from which he ultimately distanced himself after parliament watered it down, and a board member of the National Council for Study of the Securitate Archives (CNSAS), Dumitrescu died on Friday (December 5th) at the age of 80. 
The elderly dissident pulled no punches regarding sectors of modern Romania. In July, he told SE Times that "the justice system itself is the most corrupt", not only because young magistrates embrace corruption and a fast track to riches, but also "because [many] of the judges have Securitate-communist roots". 
And yet, he remained "an optimist", noting how young Romanians retain an interest in their country's past and mobbed the launch of his memoirs at the Frankfurt Book Fair. 
"I believe in the miracle this nation is capable of from time to time," Dumitrescu concluded. 
He did not live to see the first verdict pronounced by a national court in a lustration case, in which it sided with the defendant. After the CNSAS lost the power to adjudicate such cases, the courts took over. They will base their decisions on the files and recommendations of the CNSAS. 
The Bucharest tribunal issued that initial verdict on December 5th, ruling that although defendant Dan Trancota -- a Social Democratic Party (PSD) regional official from 2000 to 2004 -- informed for the Securitate, he did not infringe on any human rights, since they hardly existed during communism. It thus rejected the CNSAS's request that the court formally identify Trancota as a "Securitate collaborator". 
Trancota signed a collaboration agreement on July 17th 1979 with the Securitate office in Mehedinti. Code-named "Dobrin", he informed on two teachers, two physicians and a family belonging to a religious cult. 
"The defendant's attitude in collaborating with such an authority, as well as the activities he committed, are contemptible ... However ... in such a [repressive] society, his [informing on others] does not justify him being called a collaborator of the Securitate," the ruling read. 
It was a verdict that likely would have disappointed Dumitrescu, given all he had worked for and witnessed. 
