15/12/2006
(AP, Council of Europe, OSCE - 14/12/06; AP - 12/12/06)
Welcoming Albania's progress towards a functioning pluralistic democracy, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) voiced regret Thursday (December 14th) that confrontation and obstructionism continue to plague political life in the country. 
 "The poor political climate is delaying reforms, in particular in the field of election legislation and the media, which are urgently required in view of the forthcoming local elections," the 46-nation watchdog, based in Strasbourg, France, said in a draft resolution due to be approved next month. 
Albania is scheduled to hold local elections on January 20th. Citing the ruling Democratic Party (DP)-led coalition's unwillingness to reform the electoral code, the main opposition Socialist Party said on Thursday that it would not participate in the plenary sessions of parliament until a consensus on the reform is reached. 
The January elections will be a "major test for the capacity of the Albanian authorities to organise free and fair elections", the PACE document said, urging Tirana to quickly address critical issues regarding voters' lists, election administration, vote counting, tabulation and appeals procedures. 
 Under an August agreement between the governing and opposition parties, the temporary voter registers were to be cleaned up by October 20th and be used as a source for the voters' lists. The SP has called for a postponement of the elections until spring, so that the lists can be changed. 
 Earlier this week, the European Commission (EC) urged Albania's political parties to take responsibility for electoral reform and "not expect the international community to arbitrate among them". 
Albania's parties should "work together constructively to ensure the free and fair conduct of the local elections," the AP quoted the EC as saying in a statement, issued after a routine meeting with Albanian authorities. 
President Alfred Moisiu called on the country's politicians "to co-operate with responsibility and trust each other so that they achieve consensus to fulfil their constitutional obligations towards the country and the citizens". 
The political criteria Albania must meet to join the EU coincide with the country's commitments and obligations to the Council of Europe, in the field of democracy, the rule of law and human rights, PACE noted. 
It welcomed "the measures already taken to establish and enforce a zero tolerance policy in the fight against organised crime, trafficking and corruption," but called for further efforts. It noted in particular the need for careful preparation of legislation that fully respects the principles of the rule of law and for a better use of both domestic and international expert advice in the process. 
PACE also called on Albania to focus on improving the implementation of legislation, as efforts in this area have not produced tangible results. "Effective implementation could be further strengthened by ensuring an increased transparency of the law drafting process," the organisation said. 
It also noted the need for further efforts in judicial and media reform, the fight against domestic violence and trafficking in human beings, the prevention of torture, and respect for minority and children's rights. 
