06/06/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 06/06/05
The floods that struck several Romanian counties in April killed four people and damaged 5,467 houses -- 830 of which were totally destroyed. More than 160,000 hectares of crops were ravaged, and some 1,450km of national and local roads are in need of repair. The most serious damage occurred in the southwest Banat region, though the raging waters also affected parts of central Romania. 
The floods were considered the worst in years, but official statistics show that similar devastation occurs annually, mainly in the spring and fall. Thousands of houses and hundreds of thousands of hectares of arable land suffer yearly due to floods in Romania. 
Despite the high predictability of such disasters, authorities seem unprepared. Most local residents in areas struck by the disaster had to evacuate themselves, using their own vehicles, leaving behind animals, electrical appliances and last year's harvest supply. Many say that, with better planning and assistance, these could have been salvaged. Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu has criticised the country's state of emergency preparedness, saying it suffers from lack of equipment, specialised personnel and intervention strategies. 
Witnesses have reported a total lack of co-ordination between various public institutions. "We have motor boats, but the mayors in the flooded villages were not able to tell us where to intervene," says Marian Ghencea, the co-ordinator of Timisoara's disaster fighting department. In Timis County, meanwhile, the Emergency Situations Inspectorate could offer only a few old paddleboats, having spent most of its money on a new computer network. 
Though Romanian officials have confirmed that water pumps were available, these weren't used. A state of emergency wasn't declared until two weeks after the waters began rising. For that reason, the army -- which has the best equipment and most qualified personnel -- wasn't asked to intervene until the disaster was well under way. 
In all, the floods caused more than $500m in damages, authorities say. The state budget will provide as much financial help as possible, but international assistance will also be necessary. The United States and the UN have allocated about $650,000, and it is possible that the EU budget may cover a significant part of the remaining costs. 
