20/12/2004
(FT, Office of the High Representative - 20/12/04; BBC, Reuters, RTE, FENA, BBC Monitoring - 19/12/04; AFP, Reuters, CNN - 18/12/04)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) must co-operate with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and meet EU conditions if it wants to move ahead on the road to a better future, High Representative Paddy Ashdown said Sunday (19 December). 
"There is one task for BiH, which is not changed by resignations, and it would be only further delayed by elections, and that's to co-operate with the ICTY and to continue with the EU reforms," Ashdown said Sunday. "The longer we fail to do that, the future is more distant from us," he added. 
Last Thursday, one week after BiH's application for membership in NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme was rejected for the second time this year due to a failure to co-operate with the UN tribunal, Ashdown announced a series of measures designed to address problems with law enforcement and security. The steps were prompted also by recent revelations that the army of BiH's Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska (RS), is continuing to protect one of the tribunal's most-wanted indictees, Ratko Mladic, who reportedly celebrated a holiday at an army installation in eastern BiH over the summer. 
The measures, which included the dismissal of nine Bosnian Serb police and intelligence officials and freezing the bank accounts of individuals suspected of collusion with war criminals, were followed by the resignations of RS Prime Minister Dragan Mikerevic and BiH Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic. Several other Bosnian Serb officials from Ivanic's Party of Democratic Progress (PDP) have also tendered their resignations, or are expected to do so by Tuesday. Borislav Paravac, the current head of BiH's tripartite presidency, has said he would step down if the Serb Democratic Party (SDS) asked him to do so. 
Sulejman Tihic, the Bosnian Muslim representative of the BiH presidency, said he hoped RS politicians would not take actions that could jeopardise the functioning of authorities at the state level. He described Ashdown's measures as being "in the interests of RS and BiH citizens" alike. 
"It is very important that the nature of my original measures is understood, and it is important that the nature of these resignations is also understood," Ashdown said Sunday. "The measures I announced last week are not designed to punish the citizens of the RS. Far from it. These measures have a clear and logical purpose -- to provide space, time and means for the RS to get into line with Dayton so that BiH can move forward." 
Washington has also responded to the Bosnian Serb entity's lack of co-operation. At a joint press conference with Ashdown on Thursday, US Ambassador Douglas McElhaney said his country had decided to freeze the assets of the SDS and prohibit US citizens from financial transactions with the party. In addition, travel restrictions were being imposed on the leaderships of both the SDS and the PDP, McElhaney said. 
