02/12/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 02/12/05
Former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, the UN secretary general's special envoy for Kosovo status talks, paid a visit to Tirana as part of his fact-finding mission to the region. 
During meetings with top officials, he welcomed Albania's position with regard to the talks. The Balkan country, with its ethnic and cultural ties to Kosovo, has said it does not intend to become an actor in the negotiations process, though it is ready to help. 
"The way the Albanian government is acting is the best," Ahtisaari said. "They (the Albanian authorities) are following actively the situation and are willing to assist us. It would have been impossible, if many sides had expressed their interest in becoming actors in the process. This would have complicated the situation," he added. 
The negotiations will go hand in hand with the implementation of UN-set standards, the envoy said, calling on institutions and political figures in Pristina to co-operate not only with the Albanian community in Kosovo, but also with representatives of the province's minorities and with Belgrade. 
The decentralisation process, the return of refugees, maintenance of public order, and the protection of minorities are crucial priorities, he said. 
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's appointment of Ahtisaari, and the envoy's subsequent Balkan tour, marked the formal start of efforts to determine the future of Kosovo. Most analysts agree that it will be a daunting challenge. Kosovo is technically still part of Serbia-Montenegro, which is seeking to retain some form of sovereignty over the province. Its ethnic Albanian majority, however, wants complete independence from Belgrade. 
In comments during Ahtisaari's visit, Albanian President Alfred Moisiu stated "The province cannot go back where it was … it is not going to split or merge with another state," he said 
"This formula, accepted by the international community, is a crucial and realistic basis for the negotiations, for a right and sustainable solution, which does not leave problems for the future. For Albania this solution is the independence of Kosovo," he added. 
 Prior to arriving in Tirana, Ahtisaari visited the Montenegrin capital, Podgorica. While there, he reiterated that Kosovo cannot return to the period prior to March 1999 and there will be no territorial or border changes in the province. 
