13/09/2004
(International Herald Tribune - 13/09/04; AFP, FT, Anadolu Agency - 12/09/04; CNN, AFP - 10/09/04)
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has warned that a negative decision on Turkey's EU bid could harm his country's relations with the Union. EU leaders are expected to decide in December whether to give Turkey a date for opening accession talks. The country became an official EU candidate in 1999. 
Turkey has done its best to meet the EU political criteria required for the talks to begin, Erdogan said late Saturday (11 September). Pointing to sweeping legislative measures the country has adopted, he acknowledged that more needs to be done to implement the reforms, but said this involves "a change of mentality" and the passage of time. Turkey will "pursue this goal with determination," Erdogan said. 
The decision by EU leaders on whether to give the go-ahead for accession talks will largely be based on a report the European Commission (EC) is due to issue on 6 October. The document will assess Turkey's progress in fulfilling the criteria. 
After a four-day visit last week, EU Enlargement Commissioner Guenter Vereugen said the reforms undertaken already prove Turkey is capable of meeting EU norms, but was unlikely to join the Union before 2015. In an interview for Germany's <I>Sueddeutsche Zeitung</I> published on Saturday, he also warned that a possible refusal by the 25-nation bloc to set an opening date for Ankara's accession talks would have a "fatal" effect and could spell the end of the reform process. 
Just weeks before the EC is to release its report, members of the Union still appear to be split on the issue of Turkish membership. Questioning Turkey's long-term democratic and secular credentials, EU Farm Commissioner Franz Fischler was quoted last week as warning about the financial impact of its inclusion. He urged Brussels to offer Ankara "a special partnership status" rather membership. 
On Saturday, Erdogan sought to allay fears that admitting Turkey would burden Europe economically, saying his country is "strong enough" to stand on its own. He declined to elaborate on the exact repercussions of an EU refusal, but said his government would not simply stand by. 
"I do not want to consider such a possibility, but I believe all our friends should think carefully on the possibility of a negative decision derailing our ties," Erdogan said on Saturday. 
Meanwhile, neighbouring Greece reiterated its support for Turkey's EU membership bid Saturday. A "European Turkey is in everybody's interest," Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis said, adding that Ankara had made an enormous effort towards reform. 
