26/02/2007
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 26/02/07
The world's newest country, which became independent from its union with Serbia in June 2006, will not get a shortcut to EU membership, Union Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has said. This sentiment was reiterated in a document the EU submitted last month to Montenegro, listing tasks the country must complete before it can obtain Union membership. 
"Montenegro must adopt new constitution based on broad consensus, in line with European standards, especially in fields of human and minority rights, judiciary, defence and security forces control," the EU said in the European partnership document. 
The European partnership is a comprehensive document that was adopted in January by the EU Council of Ministers. The document outlines the conditions that the newly independent state needs to fulfill in the short-term (the next two years) and the mid-term (the next three to four years). 
The council highlighted Montenegro's shortcomings -- public administration and judiciary dependence of government, nepotism, corruption and lack of administrative capacity -- and requires them to be remedied. 
The document recommends that Montenegro continue its efforts for public service reform implementation, including transparency of employment, professionalism and accountability. 
"Montenegro must continue to strengthen European integration structures at all levels, including ministries and parliament, as well as mechanisms for EU activities and co-ordination," the EU said in the partnership agreement. 
The Union also seeks judiciary system reforms -- especially changes to the law giving parliament the responsibility to approve judges and promotions. The council recommends implementing a transparent procedure based on professionalism and impartial criteria for the selection of judges and their promotions. 
Improvements in fighting organised crime and corruption at all levels are the next EU requirement, as well as strengthening parliamentary control over defence and security structures. "Codification of election laws must take place, as well as establishing rules for media coverage of campaign ... Transparent framework for campaign financing is also needed," the Union said. 
The agreement also emphasises improving the Customs department capacity to apply product origin rules, adjust the country's trade regime, establish a consumer protection system and administrative capacity. 
Montenegro is asked to apply an efficient public procurement regime in line with EU standards and ensure full transparency of the procedure. 
"Montenegro must change the law on conflict of interests in order to avoid all cases of possible conflict of interests of state officials. Efforts on implementing an anti-corruption strategy must be improved, especially with adequate financial and human resources," the Union said. 
