02/05/2013
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 02/05/13
A month into his tenure as governor of the Central Bank of Kosovo, Bedri Hamza is pledging to maintain the top bank's active role among national institutions involved in combating economic crime. 
Hamza's appointment to the position was criticised by the opposition and civil society groups because he is a key figure in Kosovo's majority coalition. He served as finance minister before resigning in January. 
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Hamza said the Central Bank "will continue to be active in working groups and relevant mechanisms in national level which aim to combat the informal economy [and] money laundering." 
Hamza said the bank will create a stable, transparent and trusted financial system in Kosovo. 
Samir Lleshi, a financial expert with the Kosovo Chamber of Commerce, said the Central Bank can only battle economic crime in combination with police, prosecutors and courts. 
"All these institutions should combat economic crime and in the short term, they should process and take a decision, because if they take too long they become an indicator of lack of seriousness in the prevention and fight against economic crime," Lleshi told SETimes. 
Nine commercial banks are operational in Kosovo, which Hamza said will impact competition for banking products and their prices. He added that Kosovo remains a leader in the region in regards to economic growth, fiscal and banking system stability, and he endorsed the concept of a regional stock exchange. 
"Small economies like those of most countries in our region have failed to create a dynamic stock exchange except some few cases. A regional stock exchange would be an opportunity of encouraging cooperation and quicker development of individual countries and the region as a whole," Hamza said. 
For many citizens and businesses, a more pressing concern is Kosovo's high interest rate. Hamza expects that alongside progress in the business environment, there will also be increased operational efficiency of the banking system and subsequently a significant reduction in the interest rates on loans. 
Lleshi said high interest rates can be regulated by a directive from the Central Bank, but added that competition among the banks should be relied upon to regulate the rate. He said that as an alternative, the Central Bank could consider establishing a bank for development with lower interest rates that would impose the necessity to other banks to lower their rates. 
The Central Bank's main responsibility, Hamza said, is to ensure a stable financial system. He said the level of stability will be assessed by the continuing oversight of banking activities and adequate analysis by relevant departments in the Central Bank. 
Considerable revenues are provided by remittances, inputs from the diaspora, and thus the country is concentrated in cash payments. Hamza said the Central Bank has established the National Payments Council, which aims to promote ways of making payments without cash. 
"Data from the domestic payments system show a continuous increase in the volume and value of transactions executed through the banking system," Hamza said, adding that the Central Bank's contribution within the interagency group to reduce the informal economy remain an important priority. 
Hamza's selection to lead the Central Bank was strongly opposed by civil society and the opposition because of his previous senior position in ruling Democratic Party of Kosovo. However, he pledged to act independently. 
"The independence of this institution is guaranteed with the law of Central Bank of Kosovo. During my leadership this independence will be preserved and accurately protected," Hamza said. 
Alban Hashani, research director at the Riinvest Institute, told SETimes that Hamza's selection to the post has spoiled the independent dimension of the institution. 
"As a key member of a political party yesterday, its political independence is questionable. Moreover, the way of electing people politically identified in top positions of independent institutions creates an inconvenient precedent," Hashani said. 
He added that the Central Bank should be committed to prove that its independence has not been compromised. In the absence of monetary policy, Hashani said, the activity of the bank is limited, however its activity as a regulator should be strengthened. 
"Furthermore, the same should promote market expansion and increased competition in the banking and insurance market, which will enable an improvement in financial institutions' offerings," Hashani said. 
Are Kosovo's institutions, such as the Central Bank, taking an active enough role in reducing the informal economy? Share your comments below. 
