27/06/2008
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 27/06/08
Political directors of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board decided in Sarajevo this week that the Office of the High Representative (OHR) will remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) as long as the country fails to fulfil all five objectives and two conditions set at the PIC meeting on February 27th in Brussels. 
Finishing their two-day session on Wednesday (June 25th) in Sarajevo, the political directors stressed that the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) two weeks ago delivered the first of two conditions for the OHR's transition to the Office of the European Union's Special Representative (EUSR). However, in a joint communiqué, they urged political leaders in BiH to fulfil the remaining criteria. 
In this respect, the government must solve the problem of state property and military-owned real estate. It still needs to legally define the status of the Brcko District to complete the Brcko Final Award. With regard to fiscal sustainability, the establishment of the Fiscal Council is a must. The government furthermore must adopt a national war crimes policy to entrench the rule of law. 
The PIC Steering Board also reiterated the government's need to fulfil the second condition, obtaining a positive assessment by the PIC of the BiH situation, by fully obeying the Dayton Agreement and avoiding any inflammatory acts. 
The Russian delegation refused to sign the communiqué because it insisted on a fixed date for terminating the OHR mandate. 
"Other PIC members could not accept [the Russian] request as it would go against the entire philosophy, which is based upon results and not time," High Representative to BiH Miroslav Lajcak said afterward. 
Some authorities, however, are demanding the immediate termination of the OHR. BiH Prime Minister Nikola Spiric said at the PIC meeting that "those who call for the further existence of the OHR in BiH do not recognise the credibility of domestic institutions." 
BiH presidency member Haris Silajdzic, leader of the Party for BiH, stressed that the majority of fellow party leaders attending the meeting opposed terminating the OHR at this time. PIC members and the representatives of BiH institutions unanimously say constitutional reform is necessary and that such activities will commence after local elections in October. 
"However, I do not favour the artificial connection of the OHR mandate with the new constitution," Lajcak stressed. He said the next meeting of the PIC political directors will take place in Sarajevo in November. 
