16/02/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 16/02/09
Warning of backward steps taken in recent months, the European Commission (EC) is urging Romania to regain the momentum in judicial reform and fighting corruption. The recommendation came in an interim report released on Thursday (February 12th) 
"The pace of progress noted in the Commission's report of July 2008 has not been maintained," the EC said. "Although there have been some positive signals in judicial reform, results are difficult to demonstrate." 
More efforts are needed to maintain the legislative and institutional stability of the country's anti-corruption framework, the report said. 
"Some investigations of high level cases remain blocked by the Romanian parliament," it said, in an apparent reference to the corruption allegations brought against former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase. Authorisation of a criminal investigation into Nastase's activities has stalled in parliament. 
Brussels does have some positive words for the state of Romania's anti-corruption efforts. The report found the National Anti-Corruption Department (DNA) is demonstrating a stable, positive performance when it comes to high-level investigations. Last week's presidential decree reconfirming Daniel Morar as DNA head won praise from the EC. 
At the same time, the report urged parliament to improve the way in which it administers such cases and to allow investigation of all relevant ones. 
 It also pointed to the national shortage of prosecutors, noting that the government has filled vacancies without a mechanism that would ensure proper professional qualifications. Moreover, the EC noted, important laws affecting the Romanian judicial system went into effect without any consultation with the Superior Magistrates' Council. 
The Romanian attorney general, Codruta Kovesi, described the report as positive. 
"It is a reality that the files concerning the ministers are not finalised yet because of the parliamentary procedures," she said. "I have constantly said it is not normal for parliamentary procedures to block the judicial procedures … it is important for parliament to pronounce on the basis of the prosecutor's office solicitations." 
Justice Minister Catalin Predoiu said the interim report was objective and contains "a factual inventory of the problems and progress". 
The full report will emerge in July, when the European Executive in Brussels decides whether it will continue monitoring Romania's judicial system. 
