05/12/2005
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 05/12/05
In a sign that the United States wants to spur talks, Frank Wisner was appointed as US special envoy for Kosovo status on Saturday (3 December). Wisner, a high profile, career ambassador, will join the negotiation team led by UN Special Envoy Marti Ahtisaari. 
"[Wisner is] good, fits the profile and shows they [the United States] want the job done properly," a diplomat familiar with the State Department's decision said on Thursday. 
The move followed EU security chief Javier Solana's decision to appoint Torbjörn Sohlström as his personal representative in Pristina, replacing Fernando Gentilini, who has served in the position since since April 2004. 
Ahtisaari launched a fact-finding tour last month, aimed at preparing the region for negotiations in early 2006 on the future status of the province, where the 90 per cent ethnic Albanian majority demands independence from Serbia. The United States has pressured Serbia, vowing to block it from joining NATO unless it resolves the territorial dispute over the region. 
Settling the province's final status will accelerate Kosovo's integration into the EU, President Ibrahim Rugova said during a meeting with Gentilini last week. However, the team faces the extreme stances that exist throughout the region, and the world. 
EU member states are signaling disagreement on the final status of the province, just as UN-led talks on the future of the territory get under way. Several EU member states -- including the Czech Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Greece and Italy -- are publicly, or privately, promoting their own ideas, which in some cases go beyond the EU's common position. 
"Regardless of the great respect for the EU, Kosovo's institutions and people will not embrace any foreign administrative role in the future Kosovo," said Parliament Speaker Nexhat Daci, "except a security presence, as well as a civilian presence which would have a monitoring role in human and property rights." 
Representatives of other Kosovo institutions believe that the EU should have an assisting role in the integration of Kosovo in its structures, but not an administrative one. "The EU role will become even bigger having in mind the fact that Kosovo aims to become part of the EU," said Kosovo Prime Minister Kosumi. 
