20/12/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 20/12/04
While the issue of fugitive war criminals is hardly new, it has received renewed attention in recent weeks. It has become increasingly clear that the lack of co-operation from Belgrade is posing a serious obstacle to Serbia's efforts to rejoin the international community. Brussels has continued to emphasise that prospects for EU membership will remain elusive as long as authorities fail to hand over indicted war criminals. The same holds true for joining NATO. The United States, meanwhile, has said it no longer backs the transfer of war crimes cases to Serbian courts, since authorities in the republic have failed to meet their obligations. Montenegro, which does not want its own integration prospects to be hampered by Serbian recalcitrance, is demanding that it be considered separately. 
In response, Belgrade keeps reiterating its intent to co-operate, without taking the steps needed to prove it. Indictees are said to have left Serbia, only to be later observed there. Confidential indictments are leaked, allowing fugitives to escape. The strongest calls for co-operation come from figures who have little real power to make it happen. A combination of domestic political pressures and the obstructionism of war crimes supporters within government structures is blocking progress on the issue, ensuring that a small group of criminals continues to evade justice -- while Serbia as a whole is left to pay the price. 
 For years after the end of the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic was an oft-sighted figure in Belgrade, protected by the regime of Slobodan Milosevic. Following the regime's downfall, he has been forced to maintain a lower profile. 

The official line is that Mladic was last seen in the republic sometime in 2002, during the administration of the late Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic, who was assassinated on 12 March 2003. Current Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica insists that thorough searches have yielded no evidence that Mladic is still on Serbian territory. His predecessor, Zoran Zivkovic, made similar denials. 
However, UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte has been equally insistent that Mladic has continued to find sanctuary in Serbia, adding that she has repeatedly informed Serbian authorities about places where he might be hiding. A flurry of media reports, citing diplomatic sources and newly-obtained documents, have said that Mladic was living openly in the republic until June of this year, enjoying the protection of allies and supporters within the Serbian military establishment. When pro-Western reformist Boris Tadic was elected president, the reports say, Mladic was advised to leave the country. 
Tadic is on record as saying the former warlord is probably holed up somewhere between Serbia and BiH. The president has urgently insisted on the need to round up indictees, but has limited control over the forces that are capable of doing so, such as the interior ministry and police. Other vocal advocates of increased co-operation include federal foreign minister Vuk Draskovic and the head of the state union's national council for co-operation with the UN tribunal, Rasim Ljajic. 
Aside from Mladic, the most wanted ICTY fugitives from Serbia are army generals Nebojsa Pavkovic and Vladimir Lazarevic, as well as police generals Sreten Lukic and Vlastimir Djordjevic. The indictment against them was announced on 20 October 2003. Pavkovic, Lazarevic, Lukic and Djordjevic have been charged with five counts of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws and customs of war, stemming from their role in the 1999 Kosovo conflict. The indictment cites "the forced moving and deportation of some 800,000 Albanian civilians; the murder of hundreds of Albanian civilians committed by the forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Serbia". 
Police General Vlastimir Djordjevic, a close aide of Milosevic, fled Serbia in 2000 following the transition to democracy. Serbian authorities say he is probably in Russia. The other three generals are known to still be in Serbia. Lukic was due to surrender in November, but did not do so, due to health reasons. Pavkovic has said on several occasions that he will not turn himself to The Hague. According to Belgrade media reports, Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic believes that Lazarevic may be considering surrender and voluntary extradition. Two other indictees -- Ljubisa Beara and Dragomir Milosevic -- have surrendered to the tribunal of their own accord, on 9 October and 3 December respectively. 
The difficulties which the tribunal has faced in securing co-operation from Belgrade are perhaps best summed up by the recent scandal concerning Goran Hadzic, the former leader of Serbian separatists in Croatia. Hours after Belgrade received the indictment against him -- information that was supposed to be kept confidential -- Hadzic left his family home in Novi Sad. Tribunal associates took photographs of him fleeing the house. Having apparently let him get away to begin with, Serbian authorities then launched an investigation to determine his current whereabouts. Hadzic is still on the run. 
Addressing the UN Security Council, del Ponte said she believes that four Bosnian Serbs indicted for genocide in Srebrenica -- Ljubisa Borovcanin, Vinko Pandurevic, Vujadin Popovic, and Drago Nikolic -- have also found a haven in Serbia. The government of Republika Srpska (RS) says it has given Belgrade a list of addresses where the indictees may be hiding, but Serbian police have not found them. At a meeting in late November, representatives of the two governments said that indictees often switch location, shuttling back and forth between Serbia and RS -- making the investigation more difficult. 
