27/07/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade --27/07/09
The 25th Summer Universiade, held in Belgrade earlier this month, drew about 9,000 young university athletes from 145 countries. The Universiade is the largest sports event after the Olympics. 
The competition, which was held from July 1st to July 12th, included 15 categories such as archery, swimming and tennis. 
"[Belgrade] citizens leave the best impression …the organisation [of the event] is good, there were no problems," table tennis player Lauren Thorn of Congo said. 
Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic was chairman of this year's Universiade organisation committee. 
 "Universiade was an important test for Belgrade and we passed it. The Serbian capital played host to future global leaders and I am sure that many of these young people, when they get their university diplomas, will be at the helm of leading world companies. The impression that Belgrade left on them will certainly decide that, if they are able, they will invest in Serbia and recommend it to their friends as an interesting tourist and business destination," said Djelic. 
The true heroes of this year's event, however, were its volunteers -- about 8,000 Serbian youth guided guests around the city, showing them the major attractions and good places to eat. 
Ljubomir Tasic and Kristina Milic helped carry the Universiade torch at the opening ceremony. 
"One rarely gets that kind of opportunity; it's a great honour to carry the University [Universiade] torch. I applied to volunteer... because this is an ideal opportunity to have a good time and make new friends. At the same time, it's a big responsibility, as we all want our guests' time in Belgrade to remain a pleasant memory," said Tasic. 
"The Brazilians, Chinese and Egyptians left the most positive impression on me. They're cheerful, approachable and fun," Milic said. 
Despite the fun and games, the competition hit a couple of snags. The global economic crisis and a shortage of funds forced Universiade to scale back events. The event also took place during the swine flu pandemic -- an Australian athlete was confirmed to have the virus, and about five other cases were reported. 
Russia won the most gold medals at the event, followed by China and South Korea, respectively. 
The next Universiade will be held in 2011 in China. 
