19/08/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 19/08/11
With the unemployment rate still over 40%, a slowdown in international recognitions, and obstacles on the path to EU integration, prospects remain uncertain for the people of Kosovo. According to the most recent UN Development Programme Public Pulse opinion poll, discontent remains high. 
Although the survey -- released in July -- showed a slight increase in public confidence in state institutions such as the Constitutional Court, a large majority remains dissatisfied with the political and economic situation. 
Over half of respondents expressed concern about the overall political direction, with nearly 80% blaming the government and political parties. 
Meanwhile, the country's economic woes -- including the unemployment rate -- have left 68% and 86% of Kosovar Albanians and Serbians dissatisfied, respectively. Pristina teacher Lulzim Gashi, 32, voiced a widespread view in Kosovo. "There is nothing positive, we have been going back, the politicians give promises but people are suffering in their daily life with poverty and unemployment. How can we trust them?" he told SETimes. 
Given the limited employment prospects, the feeling that education and experience will affect the chances of public sector employment falls short of 25%. Meanwhile, 34% and 19% believe family connections and bribes, respectively, will help one get employment. 
"The country is in an economic crisis which is not yet declared by the government. For the politicians, Kosovo's northern part is a challenge and will be used to hide other problems. But the people are clear the economy and northern Kosovo will be on the agenda in the coming months and perhaps years," political commentator Fatlum Sadiku told SETimes. 
 More than half, 55% of respondents, said they would join public protests for political reasons, whereas 67% said they would do so because of the economy. 
However, Aferdita Qena, a sociologist, believes there is a discrepancy between poll results and reality. 
 "In June, when Vetvendosje organised the anti-corruption protest, it confirmed the fact that people in Kosovo don't show a readiness to protest for issues like corruption, better health service or education, [because of] the fear that such protests might harm political processes like dialogue with Serbia or relations with the EU. This is the feeling," Qena told SETimes. 
Despite the economic situation, Kosovar Albanians remain optimistic, with 63% believing things will improve over the next two years. Kosovar Serbs, on the other hand, remain pessimistic with only 20% envisioning any sort of economic improvement over the same time period. 
"The current economic situation in Kosovo shows that both sides suffer with low salaries, huge unemployment, and the economic policies until now have not showed any success in improving the life of the people," Sadiku told SETimes. 
While many experts view dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia as key to future economic and political stability, the public appears decidedly sceptical. According to the UNDP poll, the dialogue is viewed as beneficial by 29% of Kosovo Albanians and 16% of Kosovo Serbs. 
"Albanians expect that through the dialogue they will be able to convince the EU to enable people here [in Kosovo] to move freely without a visa to the EU, while the Serbs consider that the dialogue will decrease the role of Belgrade in Kosovo," political commentator Dragana Rasic told SETimes. "But in general, both sides see this process with pessimism and lack of trust towards each other." 
