06/01/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 06/01/10
Serbia could withdraw its genocide lawsuit against Croatia if the other country agrees to do the same, President Boris Tadic said this week after Belgrade filed its case at the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague. 
"I am deeply convinced that, politically and legally, there is room for the dropping of both lawsuits before the ICJ and for this dispute to be rationalised," Tadic said. "We wish to avoid a confrontation of states, because that is in nobody's interest." 
Serbian representatives officially filed suit on Monday (January 4th), countering a genocide case brought by Croatia in 1999. 
According to statements issued by the legal team that will represent Serbia, Belgrade will attempt to prove that the Croatian military is responsible for genocide against Serbs in Croatia during the 1991 to 1995 conflict. 
"Serbia has done everything to avoid this outcome, but it had no choice but to countersue Croatia for genocide," Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said after the submission of the case. 
He added, however, that Belgrade will attempt to preserve stability in the Balkans and to co-operate with Croatia in the European integration process. 
According to Radoslav Stojanovic, who headed Serbia's legal team in a genocide case brought by Bosnia and Herzgovina, the court proceedings in the new suit will require at least two years. In his view, Croatia and Serbia may eventually opt to settle out of court. 
Serb associations in Croatia have welcomed Belgrade's counter-charges. The chairman of the Veritas association, Savo Strbac, says the case could force the Croatian government to tackle the issue of displaced Serbs, as well as repatriation, property issues and rights to pensions and housing. 
Croatian presidential candidates Ivo Josipovic and Milan Bandic, however, were unanimous in declaring that Belgrade cannot win its case against Croatia. Moreover, Bandic demanded that Serbian representatives come to Croatia and apologise for the crimes committed during the war. 
Josipovic has said that Croatia and Serbia could reach an agreement if Belgrade fulfilled several conditions. He said these involve the search for the captured and missing persons, as well as the return to Croatia of all cultural treasures stolen during the war. 
