10/06/2011
(European Commission, AFP, DPA, AP, BBC, Deutsche Welle, Bloomberg - 10/06/11; AFP, European Voice - 09/06/11)
Croatia has met the requirements for closing the last four chapters in its EU entry talks, the European Commission (EC) said on Friday (June 10th), proposing July 1, 2013 as an indicative date for the Balkan country's admission into the EU as its 28th member. 
"Today is a historic day for Croatia and for the EU," EC President Jose Manuel Barroso said in a statement, praising the Zagreb authorities and "the current government" in particular for their "hard work" towards achieving that goal. 
 Croatia, which began its accession talks with Brussels in October 2005, is now set to become the second former Yugoslav republic to join the EU, after Slovenia's entry as part of the bloc's big-bang expansion in 2004. 
 Of 35 chapters, the only four in Zagreb's negotiations that are still open following the provisional closure of the one on fisheries Monday include those on competition, judiciary and fundamental rights, financial and budgetary provisions, and "other issues". 
Judicial reform has been typically one of the toughest areas in the Balkan countries' membership talks with the EU. Bulgaria and Romania, the newest EU members from the region, were slapped with an unprecedented Co-operation and Verification Mechanism upon their entry in 2007, under which their progress in fighting corruption and organised crime is still being monitored by the EC. 
 Keen to avoid a repetition of the same embarrassing scenario, the EC has been closely watching Croatia's efforts in implementing the required judicial reforms. 
"The last stumbling block was the judiciary," EU Justice Commissioner Viviane Reding said on Thursday before joining the bloc's justice and home affairs ministers for a two-day meeting in Luxembourg. 
"I didn't believe last year that Croatians could do it. But in one year's time they completely reformed their judiciary and made it irreversible," she added. "They are on track and we can give, with very much calm and a good heart, a 'yes' to Croatia." 
 Nevertheless, the EC will continue to watch the country's reform progress during the ratification process of Croatia's accession treaty by all member states, which usually takes up to two years and is expected to be completed by July 2013. 
There is an EU summit on June 23rd and 24th, at which leaders of the bloc's 27 nations are expected to give their approval for the conclusion of membership talks. 
The EC's recommendation is not only a major development for Croatia, but for the entire region, Barroso noted on Friday, hoping that the move will serve as an impetus for further reforms in other Balkan countries. 
 "This important step forward by Croatia towards membership is also a signal to the rest to of South Eastern Europe: It shows that enlargement works, that the EU is serious about its commitment, and that structural European reforms in the countries pay off," he stressed. 
Asked to comment on that expected move, Croatian President Ivo Josipovic told AFP on Thursday that it would open "a new page" in his country's history. 
But he also cautioned that the next 24 months until Croatia joins the Union as a full-fledged member will not be easy, as the country will need to make further efforts towards achieving EU standards. 
