09/01/2009
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina - 09/01/09
After an outbreak of violence in and near Serb-dominated northern Mitrovica, including Suhadoll, where vandals damaged two cars Tuesday (January 6th) evening, police on Wednesday called the situation stable. 
Kosovo's government is promising a grant of 100,000 euros to help ethnic Albanians whose shops were burned down by rioting Serbs last week. The government says the money will help them rebuild their businesses in the ethnically divided town of Mitrovica. Two separate outbreaks of arson destroyed at least six shops last week. 
On Monday, Serbian President Boris Tadic wrote to the UN and the current EU presidency-holder, the Czech Republic, asking for better protection of Kosovo Serbs. 
Tadic faulted international peacekeepers for failing to "protect the Serbs, who are the most endangered [residents of] Kosovo and Metohija". 
On the other hand, Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu said Serbia may be seeking to destabilise Kosovo in hopes of attaining a partition. 
Sejdiu called his own country "stable" and dismissed Tadic's letter to the UN as "worthless" following a meeting with Czech Ambassador to Pristina Janina Hrebickova. She has stated the EU presidency's support for a Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU. 
Rada Trajkovic, chief executive of the committee of the Serb National Council of Kosovo, blamed Serbs for the violence in Mitrovica. 
 "Serbs threw a firebomb at firefighters and reporters from TV Most. They tried to destroy the videotape showing the events of that evening," Trajkovic said. 
Mitrovica Mayor Bajrami Rexhepi also accused Serbs of provoking tensions. "Certain groups of organised Serbs in the north are generating the incidents on purpose to keep the situation tense," he said. 
Ramush Haradinaj, leader of the opposition Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, said the Kosovo government should send additional police to the north. He suggested opening two police substations in northern Mitrovica and one in Leposavic. 
Wolfgang Petritsch, the former EU special envoy to Kosovo, had a gloomy view of the future, saying tensions in Mitrovica would continue as long as Kosovo's status remains unresolved. He argues securing Mitrovica will require EU measures, with NATO's support. 
