28/03/2007
By Bekim Greicevci for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 28/03/07
In a report submitted Monday (March 26th), UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari told the Security Council that independence, supervised by the international community, is the only viable solution for Kosovo. The former Finnish president's recommendations followed months of talks between Belgrade and Pristina that failed to bridge the fundamental gap between the two sides. 
Messages of support for the blueprint have come from UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon, the US State Department, the United Kingdom, the EU Presidency and NATO. In Pristina, Kosovo's ethnic Albanian leadership welcomed Ahtisaari's statement, and also sought to reach out to the province's Serb community. 
"The independence of Kosovo will be in the service of all citizens, both the Albanian majority and the minority communities. It will be in the service of peace, stability and the overall prosperity of our country," President Fatmir Sejdiu said. 
Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku called on the province's 100,000 Serbs to end their boycott of local institutions and accept Ahtisaari's plan. Serbs are "very welcome in our society, they are very welcome to build together the future," he said. 
Non-Serb minorities in Kosovo have said they support the idea of supervised independence. The Kosovo Turkish Democratic Party said Ahtisaari's plan provides all the conditions for the existence of the Turkish community -- such as language, culture and education. 
But Kosovo Serbs and authorities in Belgrade continued to express hope that Moscow would block Security Council approval of the plan and force further status talks. 
"Russia will block the endorsement of the new resolution on Kosovo until an acceptable solution for both parties is found," said Oliver Ivanovic, a prominent Kosovo Serb leader. 
On Tuesday, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica issued a statement saying Russia would scuttle the Ahtisaari plan with a "historic veto". He said he was convinced that this would lead to new negotiations under a new UN mediator. 
Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov, however, appeared unwilling to commit the Kremlin to a Security Council showdown. He told reporters that Moscow was still studying the plan. "I think it is premature to say who is going to vote and how," Lavrov said. 
In Brussels, NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said members of the Alliance have overcome any differences over Kosovo and now unanimously back the Ahtisaari plan. There is a "clear and strong sense of unity" on this issue, he told reporters after a meeting of the North Atlantic Council (NAC). 
De Hoop Scheffer also expressed hope that the Security Council would resolve the Kosovo issue within a few weeks or months. "There is no need to rush this through the Security Council, but on the other hand, there should be no unncessary delay," he said. The Council is expected to hold its first formal debate on the plan on April 3rd. 
The NATO chief acknowledged that the status issue was a difficult one for Belgrade, but said NATO is willing to invest in its ties with Serbia under the framework of the Partnership for Peace programme. 
US Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns, who attended the NAC meeting on Tuesday, said that although he expected some tough times at the UN Security Council, a solution would likely be found by May. He said Washington backs Ahtisaari's proposals and opposed the idea of further negotiations. 
"We are not going to be open to any fundamental alteration of [the Ahtisaari] plan," Burns said. 
