18/07/2007
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European times in Skopje -- 18/07/07
Macedonia is hosting two major cultural festivals this summer -- one in the capital, and the other in the country's tourist mecca, Ohrid. The events provide an opportunity for tourists and residents alike to attend concerts, ballets, plays and shows. They can also take in Ohrid's magnificent lake views and Skopje's rich history. 
The 47th Ohrid Summer festival opened on July 12th with a performance of Khachaturian's "Spartacus" by the Ukraine National Ballet. Following tradition, the opening ceremony was held at the Antique Theatre. Austrian President Heinz Fischer and Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader were among the dignitaries who joined the festival's sponsor, Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski, at the ceremony. 
Dozens of pianists, string instrument players, cellists and others from 24 countries will perform at Ohrid, according to festival director Toni Simonovski. 
One of the most anticipated events is a concert by US soprano Barbara Hendricks, scheduled for Thursday (July 19th). The programme also includes performances by a famous Spanish guitar quartet, The Romeros, as well as Cypriot-French pianist Cyprien Katsaris. Other international guests include Slovenia's Pandur Theatre and the Istanbul City Theatre. 
The Macedonian National Opera and Ballet will be staging Verdi's "Rigoletto", while the National Theatre will be premiering Zlatko Slavenski's "Solaris". The Skopje-based Albanian Theatre will also stage a premiere, this one by Stefan Capaliku. Macedonian piano virtuoso Simon Trpceski, who will play a concert with Russia's Musica Viva under the baton of Alexander Rudin, will close the five week-long festival, which runs through August 20th. 
The event is being held at its traditional venues -- the Antique Theatre, St. Sofia Church, and Saraj. 
Earlier this summer, the Ohrid Summer Directorate sponsored a two-hour concert for classical music lovers by the Israeli Philharmonic, under the baton of world-renowned conductor Zubin Mehta at the Metropolis Arena in Skopje. 
In the capital, as part of the 12th Skopje Summer Festival, numerous events have been organised in venues such as the Skopje Fortress, Daut Pasin Amam in the Old Bazaar and various outdoor discos. Performers include renowned Macedonian guitar player and former Leb i Sol leader Vlatko Stefanovski, Jan Akkerman of the Netherlands, Britain's Nemo Brothers and US guitarist Sherman Robertson. 
