03/05/2007
(DPA, Euronews, New York Times, Washington Post, The Guardian, The Times, UPI - 03/05/07; AFP, AP, Reuters, BBC, FT, International Herald Tribune, RFE/RL, Euobserver, Stratfor, US Department of State - 02/05/07)
The almost weeklong quarrel between Estonia and Russia escalated on Wednesday (May 2nd), when pro-Kremlin youth activists attacked the Baltic country’s embassy and envoy to Moscow. 
Estonian Ambassador Marina Kaljurand's bodyguards had to spray gas to protect her from assailants at a press conference she called to protest the lack of security around her country's embassy. Estonia's diplomatic mission in Moscow has been besieged by members of the Russian youth organisation "Nashi" (Ours) and other groups since late last week. Earlier Wednesday, demonstrators tried to prevent Kaljurand from leaving the embassy. 
The same day, Swedish Ambassador Johan Molander came under attack on his way out of the building. Demonstrators kicked his car and tore the Swedish flag off the vehicle, keeping him blockaded for some 15 minutes. 
Expressing "grave concern" over Wednesday's incidents, Germany, which currently holds the Union's rotating presidency, urged Russia to meet its obligations under the Vienna Convention on the immunity of diplomatic staff and ensure proper security. 
Estonian President Toomas Hendrik Ilves sent a message urging Russian authorities to "remain civilised". 
The Estonian consular service, which has already stopped issuing visas to Russians, was closed Wednesday for safety reasons. Estonia has also begun evacuating the families of its diplomats in Moscow. The tension began last week, after Estonia relocated a war memorial statue erected in 1947 and the remains of several Russian soldiers from Tallinn's centre to a military cemetery outside the capital. 
The move sparked riots by ethnic Russians, who account for about a quarter of Estonia's population of 1.3 million people. Dozens of protesters were injured, one person was killed and hundreds were arrested. 
Tallinn has blamed Moscow for organising and sponsoring the riots. 
Estonian Foreign Minister Urmas Paet said in a statement Tuesday that the issue of the relocation of the Bronze Soldier statue and the vandalism that followed were internal matters, while "the co-ordinated activity of Russia against Estonia is a matter for the whole EU". 
Cyber attacks against Estonian government websites have been launched from IP addresses registered to the Kremlin, he also claimed. 
Russian Foreign Ministry spokesman Mikhail Kamynin says his country will meet its obligations, but he blamed Estonia for the rising tension. 
"Passions have been brought to the boil and we believe the blame for that rests entirely with the Estonian side," he said on Wednesday. 
The same day, Russia's state-owned railway company suddenly stopped oil deliveries to Estonian ports, attributing the move to railway repairs and a shortage of wagons. Estonian ports, according to the <I>Financial Times</I>, handle about 25% of oil shipments from Russia to world markets. Coal exports also may be disrupted. 
The developments sparked calls during a Wednesday meeting of EU ambassadors in Brussels for the postponement of an EU-Russia summit, scheduled for May 18th. 
"We are not excluding it" <I>EUobserver</I> quoted Eduards Stiprais, the Latvian ambassador to the EU, as saying after the meeting. "It depends on the Russian reaction." 
Senior NATO and US officials have voiced concerns about the escalating crisis. 
The Estonian president's office said Ilves had spoken by telephone with NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, who "condemned the anti-Estonian propaganda campaign initiated by Russia, as well as the interference of the Russian Federation in Estonia's internal affairs". 
US State Department deputy spokesman Tom Casey expressed Washington's concerns "about continuing reports of violence and harassment, including harassment of Estonian diplomatic personnel and premises in Moscow". 
He called on Moscow to observe its obligations regarding diplomatic missions and diplomats, and "avoid harsh words and escalation". 
