14/12/2009
(Nine O'clock - 14/12/09; Dnevnik.bg - 13/12/09; AFP - 12/12/09; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, Bloomberg, EurActiv, Euobserver, Euronews, European Voice, RFE/RL, The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg - 11/12/09)
EU leaders agreed on Friday (December 11th) that the 27-nation bloc will provide 7.2 billion euros over the next three years to underpin developing countries' efforts to cut their greenhouse gas emissions. 
"The EU and its member states are ready to contribute with fast-start funding of 2.4 billion euros annually for the years 2010 to 2012," they said in a statement at the end of their two-day summit in Brussels. Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt, who chaired the summit that was held three weeks before his country hands over the rotating six-month EU presidency to Spain, urged other rich countries "to make the same contributions". 
The EU pledge, he said, "is a combination of new and old resources". It also represents the Union's "fair share" of the estimated 5 billion to 7 billion euros developed nations will have to provide annually from 2010 to 2012 towards an envisioned fund aimed at helping poor countries tackle global warming, said Reinfeldt. 
While the final figures for the individual EU members' contributions may still change, Britain has emerged as the biggest contributor thus far with 1.6 billion euros for the three-year period. The Union's two other heavyweights, France and Germany, have offered about 1.2 billion euros each. The bloc's smaller nations, including those that joined after 2004, are expected to provide funds as well. 
The Union members voiced hope that the move will help secure a global agreement at the ongoing UN conference in Copenhagen. While China and the developing countries viewed the promised funding as "insignificant", UN climate chief Yvo de Boer welcomed the EU aid pledge. 
"The fact that Europe is going to put a figure on the table will, I think, be hugely encouraging to the process," de Boer said in Copenhagen on Friday. "We will then have to see what other rich countries are going to put on the table." 
Aside from the climate change conference, the EU leaders discussed institutional, economic and external relations issues, and endorsed recent decisions on enlargement. 
They agreed that, although there are signs of stabilisation, the extraordinary measures to tackle the financial and economic crisis should remain in place until the "recovery is fully secured", and that "credible and co-ordinated" exit strategies need to be developed. 
"Forecasts suggest a weak recovery in 2010, followed by a return to stronger growth in 2011," they said in Friday's statement. "But uncertainties and fragilities remain, while the employment and social situation is expected to deteriorate further in 2010." 
The group also stressed the need for "sound and effective" financial sector pay, but did not broadly support British and French proposals for the introduction of a weighty one-off levy on bankers' bonuses. 
The bloc's leaders however urged the IMF, which is already mulling ways for limiting future financial system risks, to endorse a global financial transactions tax, known as the Tobin Tax. 
The tax would levy a charge of between 0.1% and .25% on trade of currency across borders. Named after US economist James Tobin, the tax's intent is to penalise short-term speculation in currencies. 
They also approved the conclusions on enlargement and the Stabilisation and Association Process the EU foreign ministers adopted on December 8th. The document voiced support for the continuation of membership talks with Croatia and Turkey, but deferred a decision on opening accession negotiations with Macedonia until the first half of next year. 
