16/12/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 16/12/09
The Constitutional Court validated Traian Basescu for a new term on Wednesday (December 16th). 
Prime Minister-Designate Liviu Negoita also announced he has stepped down from the post to allow political parties in the country to discuss forming a majority government. 
"Yesterday [Tuesday] I gave up my mandate ... I consider that [political] consultations should take place without any impediment tied to me," he said. 
The validation comes after judges in Romania's highest court Monday unanimously rejected the Social Democrat Party's (PSD) complaint concerning alleged fraud committed during the December 6th presidential runoff. 
The dismissal of the minority government led by Prime Minister Emil Boc almost 60 days ago has left the administration incapable of passing laws and making crucial decisions. All efforts to form a new stable government have been blocked by the PSD appeal. 
The party contends that their candidate, Mircea Geoana, lost by less than 1% to incumbent Traian Basescu. The complaint asked the court to nullify the second round of elections. 
"The court turned down the application for the annulment of the runoff … filed by the [PSD] and the Conservative Party (PC)," the ruling read. The court called the complaint by the two parties "inadmissible". 
"The court validates Traian Basescu's election as the president of Romania after getting most of the valid votes," the court statement said. 
The announcement followed a recount of just over 2,000 votes that were previously deemed invalid. It didn't change the results however, -- the Liberal Democratic Party (PDL) candidate Basescu beat Geoana by 0.74%. 
Basescu will be sworn in for a second five-year term on December 21st. 
Geoana conceded defeat after the court's verdict. "As a citizen of a democratic Romania, I accept the decision of the court and bid Mr. Basescu good luck in his new term." 
"The battle for Romania's presidency ends here, but the battle for finding out the truth concerning the elections goes on," Geoana said, adding he will ask for the establishment of a parliamentary commission to further investigate alleged fraud. 
The PDL has started negotiations with the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania and the minority and independent MPs to form a parliamentary majority needed to back the new administration. 
The new political alliance is just two votes short of passing the necessary threshold needed to approve a new government. But unrest in the PSD, sparked by the unfavourable decision of the constitutional court, may help Basescu's efforts. 
There is also pressure from the IMF, currently with a mission on site, which insists that the new government adopt the 2010 budget before the holidays. 
