15/07/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/07/11
Since Kosovo's declaration of independence, its foreign policy towards the Arab world has been driven by the struggle to gain diplomatic recognition, which has yielded mixed results. 
To date, only ten countries of the Arab League have recognised Kosovo. Twelve have not. 
In addition to gaining diplomatic recognition, Kosovo has also sought out areas of bilateral co-operation in education, science and technology, and the economy. Last month's visit by Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj to the Middle East and a planned trip by Prime Minister Hashim Thaci are indicative of the emphasis Kosovo has placed on gaining Arab support and developing bilateral relations. 
Some question, however, whether Kosovo's drive to gain recognition will yield concrete results. 
"The recent visits in the Middle East, but also in Africa, do not show any long term foreign policy of Kosovo towards those regions and its effects will not be seen soon," said Frasher Haxhiu, foreign policy researcher at the Kosovo Institute for Good Governance and Public Policy (KIGAPP). 
Kosovo's foreign policy towards the region appears based on highlighting Kosovo's Islamic character – a policy that some analyst say lacks depth and foresight. 
"It's naive saying that we need the recognition from the Arab world because in Kosovo lives a Muslim majority, taking into consideration the relations this part of the world has with the 'enemies of Kosovo,'" says analyst and journalist Nduke Ukaj. 
Nonetheless, Kosovo has placed great emphasis on joining the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC), for which it has received support from heavy-weight Saudi Arabia. 
PhD candidate Olsi Jazexhi, who has studied Kosovo's relations with the Islamic world, believes Kosovo can join the OIC and benefit from the current leadership of friendly Turkey. 
"Kosovo should and can adhere to the OIC, especially nowadays when the OIC is managed by Turkey. Membership in the OIC is the right of Kosovo, as more than 90% of the population is Muslim," Jazexhi tells SETimes, adding that membership will help Kosovo become visible in international arenas. 
But not everyone agrees, questioning whether cultivating closer ties with the Arab world might harm Kosovo's trajectory towards Western institutions, making it make more difficult to join NATO and the EU. 
"Sitting with countries which have fundamentalist and dictatorial regimes is not a good signal for the West," argues Ukaj, adding that after being recognized by powerful countries like the US, Germany, France, and the UK, non-recognition by the Arab world should not worry Kosovo. 
However, whatever the merits of joining the OIC, Haxhiu points out practical limitations: "Kosovo cannot join OIC because it is not a member of the UN, which is a condition set up by OIC in its charter." 
Still, during last month's OIC Summit in Astana, Kazakhstan, where Deputy Prime Minister Behxhet Pacolli represented Kosovo, the Council of Foreign Ministers approved a resolution that "calls upon the member states of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference to consider recognising Kosovo based on their free and sovereign rights, as well as on their national practice." 
Lumnije Rifaj, an Islamic Studies scholar, tells SETimes that the new resolution approved by OIC is a dramatic change in the policy, as for the first time a unanimous resolution was approved calling on members to recognize Kosovo. 
"The resolution shows a policy shift towards Kosovo, this might be because of the political changes in the Arab world, but it calls on recognition. More important is that Serbia has not yet been accepted as an observer by arguing that Kosovo Muslims belong within its borders," Rifaj told SETimes. 
