25/11/2005
(The Times - 25/11/05; Reuters, AP, Financial Mirror, AFP, Journal of Turkish Weekly - 24/11/05)
One of the key symbols of division in Cyprus is likely to disappear before the end of this year, after Turkish Cypriots began tearing down a roadblock on their side of the split city of Nicosia on Thursday (24 November). 
The roadblock on Ledra Street has existed for more than 40 years now. A checkpoint was first built in 1958 during a campaign against British rule. Three years after Cyprus became independent in 1960, violence between the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities led to the closure of Ledra Street. The barrier was then fortified into a two-storey high wall in 1974, after Turkey invaded the island's north in response to a Greek Cypriot coup. 
Since then, the medieval Venetian city of Nicosia -- as the rest of the country -- has remained partitioned along ethnic lines. A 180km long, UN-patrolled "Green Line" divides the island into a Turkish Cypriot north and a Greek Cypriot south. 
"We want to reunite our country," Semavi Asik, deputy mayor of the Turkish Cypriot part of Nicosia, told the AP on Thursday. "This country is big enough for Turkish Cypriots and Greek Cypriots." 
The latest international effort to reunite Cyprus ended in failure in April 2004, when Greek Cypriots overwhelmingly rejected a plan for a settlement proposed by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan. Although the majority of Turkish Cypriots voted in favour of the deal, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the Mediterranean island joint the EU on 1 May last year. 
For more than three decades, the contacts between the two communities were severely restricted. In 2003, however, the Turkish Cypriots opened four crossing points, allowing thousands of people to cross from one side into the other every day. 
The latest move is expected to boost local commerce as the place returns to life with the likely opening of new shops and restaurants, decades after they disappeared from the area. Business leaders from both sides of the divide have been urging their respective authorities to open up the street. 
"The plans are all ready," Asik said. "It will bring economic benefits for both sides within the walled city." 
"It's a welcome sign of hope when there is very little or any optimism warranted on the political front," Reuters quoted a local diplomat as saying on the Turkish Cypriot move. Greek Cypriots also hailed the surprise move, suggesting they were keen to follow suit. 
"This is a welcome approach if they are opening their side," Nicosia's Greek Cypriot Mayor Michalakis Zampelas said. "We are waiting from the green light from the UN, who have some doubts concerning security," he added, referring to the possible existence of boobytraps and mines planted back in 1974. But he stressed that if the Turkish Cypriots open the street "we are ready to open too". 
In an unrelated development, the Turkish Cypriot government agreed Tuesday to pass a law aimed at accelerating the settlement of property disputes with Greek Cypriots. Once adopted by parliament, the legislation would allow Greek Cypriots to demand not only compensation or exchange, but also the return of property seized over the past decades, if it is not currently being used, or if its return would not pose a threat to public order. 
