25/08/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 25/08/11
Almost all of the deals for Black Sea coastal properties in the first half of this year involved Russian buyers, according to analysis by the real estate company Bulgarian Properties. Brokers and real estate officials believe the reason for this trend is the weak euro and low property prices. 
Russians' interest in Bulgaria in particular has to do with the strong cultural ties and easy integration due to the similarities between the languages. 
"I decided to buy a property here because of the beautiful weather, cheap prices and because it's easy to communicate with the local people," Marina, a Russian, told SETimes. "Apart from the low investment, life in Bulgaria is cheap too, which makes local resorts even more attractive." 
"I will be here for another two weeks, and then a friend of mine and her family are coming to stay in my apartment," Marina explained. 
Her unit is in an apart-hotel building, a type of property that has been a hit among foreign buyers. The building is managed by a company that sells apartments and rooms to investors, offers maintenance services to their owners, as well as an option to secure occupancy for an annual fee or commission. 
But Atanas Terziev, a real estate consultant in the southern coastal town of Tzarevo, says most Russians are no longer looking for apartments in these types of buildings because they want to avoid high maintenance fees. 
"Maintenance fees for apartments in popular resorts complexes like Slanchev Bryag can reach 5,000-6,000 euros a year," he told SETimes. "So they sell their apartments in such complexes and seek to buy properties in conventional residential buildings." 
In the past five years, over 150,000 Russians have purchased apartments or houses in Bulgaria, which accounts for an investment worth more than 695m euros. Most of these buyers are middle-class families from Moscow and St Petersburg. 
Yyrii Solovyov, general consul of the Russian Federation in the northern coastal city of Varna, told a recent press conference that these Russian citizens pay taxes in Bulgaria. Some of them are not just tourists; they come and settle to live in the country, he added. 
The boom in Russian property buyers replaces English and Irish buyers, who flooded the Black Sea and mountain resort areas during the property peak in 2006-2008. Terziev said English and Irish buyers are currently selling to Russians. 
Although he said they are not selling at a loss, some expert analysis suggests some of them are forced to sell at prices 60% lower than what they paid, because they are unable to cover their mortgages. 
Unlike the English and Irish, Russians don't rely on credit to buy property; they come with cash. 
In terms of prices, Terziev says there are great variations. Furnished apartments closest to the sea sell at about 1,000 euros per square metre. The farther a property is from the beach, the lower the price, dropping as low as 300 euros per square metre, he explained. 
The times when developers made huge profits on properties are over, Terziev said. 
Currently, the profit margin is between 15% and 30%, which is quite normal, suggesting that the market is gradually beginning to regulate itself. 
A study by Bulgarian Properties found that prices in the first half of the year have dropped by 5%, compared to a slide of 10% in 2010. Another positive signal is the significant increase in the number of deals, which was up 50%. 
"Having more Russians here is good because they buy things here, giving a boost to retail business," a resident of Tzarevo told SETimes. 
