20/03/2006
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 20/03/06
Earlier this month, more than 4,000 spectators in Sarajevo's Zetra Olympic Hall greeted the young Bosnian director Jasmila Zbanic and her movie "Grbavica", this year's main Berlin Film Festival winner. 
The official European premiere, held on 1 March in the hall built for the 1984 Winter Olympic Games, was the largest film presentation ever organised in Sarajevo. It was the culmination of celebrations that began throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on 19 February, when the movie won the Berlin Festival's Golden Bear Award. 
 "Grbavica", Zbanic's debut feature film, dramatises the agony of women raped as a part of ethnic cleansing during the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH. The story tells of a single mother named Esma who is raising her 12-year-old daughter Sara in postwar Sarajevo. Problems arising from a school trip lead Sara to questions about her mother's past, and ultimately, to painful answers. 
 "I really did not want to make a movie that would have a theme that is political," Zbanic, 31, told Southeast European Times in Sarajevo, where she lives with her husband and 5-year-old daughter. "I did not want to put daily politics in it. I just wanted to show the relation between mother and daughter." 
For BiH, a country grappling with a poor economic situation in the aftermath of war, the Berlin award provides the hope of finding an area where Bosnians can compete with the world. 
"There are too many things in our country that are not going as they should," Zbanic said. "And there is still a great mistake in thinking that things are the way they are and that nothing can be changed. I really believe that a person can change much. Everybody among us has positive energy that we have to unleash. You just need to really believe in the things you do." 
 In addition to her film success, the people of Sarajevo welcomed Zbanic's speech at the Berlin award ceremony, during which she reminded spectators that indicted war criminals Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic -- the main architects of ethnic cleansing in BiH -- are still at large. 
 "When the movie was finished, and I saw the people were emotional about it, I wanted to use the moment to say the thing which is very painful for me as a citizen of Sarajevo. The fact is that 14 years after the beginning of the war, people are still unable to arrest the two miserable war criminals. This is extremely frustrating for us who live in the city that was systematically destroyed day-by-day in the aggression," Zbanic told SETimes. 
 "In 1992 when I heard about the mass, systematic rapes and met women victims, I realised I want to do something about it. Grbavica is a part of Sarajevo, across from my flat-store, that was captured by Bosnian Serbs in 1992. All the war I saw it as a danger to me and my family. But simultaneously I felt sorrow for the people that lived there. At the same time I felt terrible fear of, and great love for, that part of the city. Also, the name -- Grbavica -- sounds hard, as well as the theme of the movie," she said. 
Nowadays, Zbanic is being treated like a heroine in BiH. Organisations of women victimised during the war hailed her because she managed to show their pain to the world. A hundred children from Grbavica Primary School welcomed her in front of Sarajevo Airport when she returned from Berlin, while the city authorities presented her with Sarajevo's most important awards -- the 6 April Award and the Keys of the City. 
The emotionally powerful film was also warmly welcomed on 2 March at the Austrian premiere in Vienna. Of particular importance for Zbanic was the special presentation in Serbia-Montenegro capital of Belgrade on 6 March, where "Grbavica" also achieved success. 
 "I just feel happy that the people accepted the movie," Zbanic said. "I always thought the awards go to the people who make numerous masterpieces and prove themselves to be good artists several times. So I feel a little strange because of the fact that this was my very first feature film. The movie was done very candidly. Everybody from the team gave their maximum performance." 
 "It is great that people recognise and accept it. But it would not be possible without the previous success of BiH filmmakers," Zbanic said, recalling her young Bosnian colleagues Danis Tanovic, winner of an Oscar and Golden Globe, as well as the Prix du Scenario at Cannes; Pier Zalica, who won the Leopard at Locarno in 2003; and Srdjan Vuletic, who won the Tiger at Rotterdam in 2004. 
"We start from phenomenal filmmakers who were our professors at our academy. The movies of Emir Kusturica are also behind us. These were fantastic movies, which were part of our childhood, and from which we began our filmmaking work," she said. 
 Because of the small budget for filmmakers in BiH, "Grbavica" was an Austrian-BiH-German-Croatian co-production. The role of Esma was performed by the popular Serbian actress Mirjana Karanovic. 
 According to Zbanic, the film provided an opportunity for ordinary people and professionals from the region to come closer, in spite of daily politics. 
"At least when it comes to my generation, we were always in contact with people in Croatia or Serbia," she said. "I remember when the Goethe Institute from Munich called filmmakers from the former Yugoslavia to come to meet each other. 
When we came there, all of us were as friends to each other. And our hosts were shocked by the fact that we sat and drank together instead of fighting with each other. We spent the entire budget on socialising, because we already knew each other from the past." 
"For any motion picture it is too small a thing to be just from BiH, Croatia, etcetera. I believe we are lucky because of the fact that we all speak similar languages on a much wider territory. So when you seek partners to make a movie it is much easier," Zbanic said. 
