11/10/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 11/10/10
October 5th was gray and rainy in Belgrade, setting the tone for the slightly melancholy event: the 10th anniversary of the downfall of Slobodan Milosevic's regime. 
 Regarded in 2000 as one of the most important days in Serbian history, it marked the return of freedom and democracy. It also kicked off the long process of reintegration into the international community. 
Ten years later, though, the mood on the anniversary date was muted. Instead of the several hundred thousand people who chased Milosevic from power in 2000, about 1,000 policemen protested on the streets of Belgrade this year. Dressed in civilian clothes, they blocked the street outside the Serbian government headquarters, demanding a raise and better working conditions. 
One of the icons of the anti-Milosevic demonstrations, Ljubisav Djokic, aka Bulldozer Joe, addressed reporters in downtown Belgrade, surrounded by around 15 friends. Ten years earlier, he'd led the charge on the building housing Serbian state TV RTS, a symbol of Milosevic's rule. 
Recalling how he drove towards the building as police officers shot at him, Djokic said, "I would start my [bulldozer] and go against the current authorities too," if he had the money to fix it. 
 "I'm surprised that the people are silent. My life has never been worse than it is now," Djokic told reporters. 
Certain statistics support his claim. 
Although it has increased three-fold since 2000, the average monthly salary in Serbia -- approximately 310 euros -- is the lowest in the region. Unemployment hovers around 20% -- between 700,000 and 1m people are believed to be jobless. The national currency, the dinar, has plummeted against the euro since the beginning of the year. Food prices have headed in the other direction, putting many people in a very difficult position. 
Marko Blagojevic says his NGO, the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy, has conducted polls that suggest the biggest concern among the public is a core one. 
 "People are worried about whether they will keep their job, whether they will have enough money for the most basic needs. They had great, often unrealistic expectations as far as October 5th is concerned," Blagojevic told SETimes. 
The Serbian political scene has undergone significant upheaval over the past decade. The two parties that spearheaded the changes of 2000, the Democratic Party (DS) and the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS), are now bitter political rivals. The Socialist Party of Serbia, led by Milosevic until his death at The Hague in 2006, is now back in power. Its officials are an important factor in Serbia's pro-European ruling coalition. Zoran Djindjic, the leader of the political movement that toppled Milosevic, was later made prime minister, and then assassinated in Belgrade on March 12th 2003. 
DSS leader Vojislav Kostunica, who beat Milosevic in the 2000 presidential election, is back in the opposition today and wants Serbia to abandon its quest for EU membership if it hinges on the abandonment of Kosovo. 
Laying a wreath on the grave of a member of his party who died in the October 5th demonstrations ten years ago, Kostunica said that Serbia should have done more over the past decade, but pointed out that in 2000 it won two important things -- freedom and democracy. 
 "After all these years, the strongest impression regarding October 5th is the people's resolve to fight for and defend freedom and democracy," said Kostunica, a former president and prime minister. 
The key figure in politics today is President Boris Tadic, who leads the DS. He says he understands public dissatisfaction with the standard of living, but stressed it has improved conspicuously over the past decade. 
"It is unsubstantiated and untrue to say that everything is the same today. The difference is enormous and a big step forward has been made. But the extensive reach of October 5th does not strip us of the belief that we could have done more and that we must do much more," Tadic said. 
One of the major changes since 2000 is the fact that the Otpor (Resistance) movement, the organisation that played a pivotal role in the toppling of Milosevic's regime, is gone. The group, led mostly by students, stood tall before the autoritarian government despite daily arrests and police beatings. After Milosevic's downfall, Otpor tried to morph into a political party, but failed to cross the election threshold, and eventually died out. 
"The great energy unleashed on October 5th has slowly fizzled out over the past ten years and there is none of it left today," one of the Otpor leaders, Ivan Marovic, told SETimes. 
 He says the most important point is that in the past decade, no government has tried to rig an election, as Milosevic had done. "As far as other things are concerned, I can't exactly say I'm satisfied," he said. 
However, he thinks Otpor's moment has passed. "We were a revolutionary organisation that used the tactics of fighting an authoritarian regime. That is why such an organisation is not necessary in Serbia today, but the country does not need … to enable citizens to better control the authorities," Marovic said. 
Some Belgraders agree that more should have been done since 2000. "I expected so much more from the change of regime. Maybe not that we would all get rich overnight, but I thought there would be justice for all. Now I can say I'm partly disappointed with everything that's happened," engineer Dragan, 45, said. 
Medical doctor Milica, 55, feels the same way. "I thought that the ten years under Milosevic was the last decade of my life I had lost. Now I have a similar feeling for the last ten years too. Maybe we all expected too much," she said. 
But Milan, 37, is an optimist. "You know the old saying -- the sun always comes after the rain. Hopefully that October 6th will dawn for us one day too." 
