18/05/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 18/05/12
Defying the financial crisis and the warnings about its possible impact, European health care continues to improve its performance, according to the Euro Health Consumer Index (EHCI) released and presented at the European Parliament on Tuesday (May 15th). 
"The gradual breakthrough of health consumer empowerment drives quality and access," Swedish private company Health Consumer Powerhouse (HCP) stated in the 6th edition of the survey, first launched in 2005. 
This year's report covers a total of 34 countries, including the 27 EU member states, plus seven other European nations -- Albania, Croatia, Iceland, Macedonia, Norway, Serbia and Switzerland. 
The HCP, which monitors and compares health care systems in all those countries, and Canada, compiled this year's Index based on a combination of public statistics, patient polls and its own, independent research. 
It ranked the surveyed nations on 42 indicators across five key areas for health consumers: patients' rights and information, accessibility of treatment [waiting times], medical outcomes, range and reach of services provided and pharmaceuticals. A country's overall score determines its position in the Index. 
As in the previous survey published in 2009, the Netherlands was again named the best performer on health care in Europe, with 872 points out of a possible maximum of 1,000. 
Serbia, which was not included in the previous report, ranked 34th in this year's Index, on the basis of its total score of only 451 points. Four other Southeast European countries -- Bulgaria, Romania, Macedonia and Albania -- were also ranked at the bottom of the table. Latvia was the only non-Balkan country included in this group. 
The best performer among the eight Southeast Europe nations included in the index was Croatia. Its score of 655 points, up from 627 in 2009, entitled it to the 17th position in the table, ahead of Cyprus and Greece. 
Dr. Arne Bjornberg, HCP COO and the head of the EHCI team, cited Croatia's high scores for medical outcomes, the same as Germany's, and health care information as the main reasons for its six-place jump from the 23rd in the previous survey. 
"The most important are the treatment results, meaning outcomes, as we call it in the Index, in Croatia are pretty good for a country of modest financial capacity," he told SETimes. 
Bulgaria's new score of 456 points, eight up from its previous mark, did not allow it to move up from 33rd place, as it still trailed far behind Romania (32nd), which again scored 489 points. 
The report gave Bulgaria a "bad mark" or an "intermediary mark" of 40 out of all 42 individual indicators. The only two "good marks" it received were for "patient organisations involved in decision making" and "EPR penetration". 
"If we are to be fair, we shouldn't be comparing Bulgaria with the rich EU member states," but with neighbouring Serbia and Romania, Bjornberg said in a local press release. To him, however, the country's failure to improve its performance since it joined the Union five years ago is worrisome. 
Many Bulgarians however believe that, in spite of the dire situation in the sector, most doctors are doing their best to help people. 
"I'm of two minds," Sofia resident Stefka Dancheva, a scenographer, whose brother underwent abdominal surgery this week, told SETimes. "The medics are doing what they must, but they don't give you information. They do not give enough explanation" about the way they are treating a patient. 
Only five out of all 34 countries got "bad marks" on this indicator, implying more than six infant deaths per 1,000 live births. But all of them are from the SEE region -- Macedonia, Romania, Bulgaria, Albania and Serbia. 
Macedonia not only fared worst on this indicator, with more than 11 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, but also posted the biggest overall decline among the countries in the region. It lost 49 points from its 2009 score, to end up with 527 and five slots down to 30th in the table this year. 
Due to their new, lower scores Albania (535 points) and Cyprus (627), each slipped one place in the table, to the 29th and 20th, respectively, an indication that the situation in their health care sectors has also deteriorated over the past three years. 
Crisis-hit Greece, however, added 17 points to its previous mark of 600, allowing it to climb two slots to the 22nd place. 
 Southeast European Times correspondent Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest contributed to this report. 
