08/03/2012
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Tuzla -- 08/03/12
Healthcare officials estimate the number of people in the region needing organ transplants at several thousand and growing. 
"The dying can save many lives if they know the importance of -- and agree to -- organ donation," Tuzla's University Clinical Centre (UKC) kidney and dialysis department head Enesa Meshic told SETimes. 
Yet incompetent national authorities in some countries, poor donation organisation and the lack of legislative framework prevent a growing number of people in the region from receiving organs they need. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) organ transplant law allows one to become a donor after signing a donor card. Patients can legally receive organs from family members or can seek organs -- and have procedures performed -- abroad if they can afford it. 
In practice, families are often reluctant to donate for ethical and religious reasons. 
The situation is markedly different in Croatia, which treats every citizen as a potential donor unless they state otherwise or list their name in a non-donor registry. 
Croatia leads the region in the number of organ transplants and that number grows by 12% annually. Croatian doctors perform more than 250 kidney transplants a year. 
The Croatia Transplant Association said that Croatia leads the world in liver and kidney transplants per million inhabitants, and is second behind Spain in performing heart transplants and in the number of organ donors. 
Kidney transplants are also most sought in BiH -- a number that grows by 15% annually, followed by liver transplants. 
There are more than 6,000 people on dialysis in Croatia and BiH, many of whom are waiting for or can potentially become in need of kidneys. 
Doctors in BiH however, said they can not satisfy the demand due to a lack of organs, as well as because of the country's internal organisation and political differences. 
"We are not a member of the Eurotransplant network, which requires a partner on a state level. BiH does not have a healthcare ministry although each of its two entities as well as ten cantons do," Dr. Emir Hodzic, UKC Kidney Transplant Department head, told SETimes. 
To help patients, doctors recently concluded an agreement with the French government to allow BiH organ transplant seekers to join French organ-waiting lists. 
"Many who are desperate go to foreign countries like India and Pakistan, and often undergo illegal and risky procedures contrary to established medical practices and ethics," UKC Internal Medicine Director Dr Mithat Tabakovic told SETimes. 
Samir Okic, a 35-year-old healthcare worker who needed a heart transplant to stay alive -- a procedure which is not performed in BiH -- became a symbol of the public struggle for organ transplants. For the procedure, he has to go to Berlin, where it costs 300,000 euros. 
BiH media publicised Okic's plight, which united Bosnians in donating money. 
"It is a huge sum. The family can not come up [with that amount] by itself, but all of us together can. We never know when we may need such help," donor Enver Karic told SETimes. 
A kidney transplant in BiH costs between 20,000 and 35,000 euros, but is covered by the state heath fund. Abroad it costs between 100,000 and 153,000 euros and patients pay in full themselves. 
The situation in Serbia is similar to BiH where over 70,000 citizens have registered as organ donors, but doctors have performed only 142 procedures in the past two years. At present, only kidney and liver transplants are performed. 
Doctors and patients fault Serbia's legal environment and insist the country must adopt a law akin to Croatia's. 
"Croatia has 36 donors per million inhabitants; Serbia only four. That is why more than 2,000 people suffer waiting to receive an organ, while in Croatia it's just a couple of hundred," Dr Dushan Shcepanovic told SETimes. 
Overall, medical professionals characterise the technical capabilities in the region as very good. 
"BiH doctors perform complex transplant surgeries but the number of procedures is low compared to regional -- and world -- parameters. Our doctors are skilled, educated under Austrian supervisors, and the service is on the level of Western Europe," Dr Senad Trnachevic, BiH Doctors' Association for Kidney Transplants, told SETimes. 
In an attempt to address organ donation and transplantation systemically, delegations of health officials from 11 regional countries met in Skopje last May. 
There has been progress since, according to Macedonia's national transplant and organ donation co-ordinator in the Southeast Europe Health Network, Dr Goce Spasovski. 
"Macedonia passed a new [EU-harmonised] law which regulates transplant processes. In the next couple of months, other acts will be brought forth to complete the entire legal framework," Spasovski told SETimes. 
He explained efforts are being made to improve not only organisation, but also investment in future professional capabilities. "We organised for doctors to work at a clinic in Turkey, where they will do five transplants, both from cadavers and from live people," Spasovski said. 
"We also began training medical personnel who will participate in transplants from cadavers to live people. I expect we will have positive news to report soon," he added. 
