14/06/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 14/06/13
Turkey's dialogue with the European Union regarding Gezi Park-related demonstrations took a strident turn after the government rejected criticism over how it has handled the widespread protests. 
The European Parliament on Wednesday (June 12th) reaffirmed its calls for Turkey to support peaceful protests and dialogue to resolve the protests without violence. But Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erodgan extended his hardline approach on the protests to the EU, saying it didn't apply because Turkey is not an EU member, but a candidate. 
The stance was affirmed by Egemen Bağis, Turkey's minister to the EU. 
“The decision passed by the parliament on the ongoing situation in Turkey is of a nature that harms our mutual aims of strengthening and spreading democracy, and one that has no relation to reality. In that sense, it is null and void to us,” he said. "Some parliaments should understand that there is a price for talking so freely and boldly about Turkey’s domestic affairs." 
Stefan Fule, EU's commissioner for enlargement, who recently visited Gezi Park and met with protesters, said this was a key time for Turkey's efforts to join the EU. He also called for "debates, consultation and compromise to reach out to all segments" in Turkey. 
"We are at a crucial moment in European Union-Turkey relations which I believe still have the potential to develop in a more constructive spirit than before," he said. "I call on Turkey not to give up on values of freedom and fundamental rights, and to do everything to avoid undermining the new momentum we aim at creating in our relations." 
Said Fule, "In the light of what is at stake, Turkey needs more European engagement, and with it more of European Union standards and values, not less." 
Protests erupted May 31st when police forcibly removed a small group of people seeking to preserve Gezi Park, a popular green space adjacent to historic Taksim Square targeted for redevelopment by Erdogan. 
Unrest quickly spread to other cities as police brutally responded to protests with indiscriminate use of tear gas, rubber bullets and water cannons. 
Erdogan and other leaders have bristled as police actions garnered internatonal news coverage. 
Protesters have called for the park to be preserved and for police officers to be punished for brutality. A court order halted the redevelopment project. 
Hüseyin Çelik, deputy chairman and a spokesman for the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), acknowledged the impact of the controversy on tourism. 
"The Gezi Park must be emptied ASAP," he said. "There has been serious damage for hotels and shopkeepers." 
In Ankara on Wednesday, Erdogan met with a group of people regarding the protests. 
Mustafa Nogay, secretary general of the Association for Protection and Beutification of Taksim Gezi Park, told SETimes protesters "surely attach importance to all the meetings. ... They are important regarding getting to hear demands by both sides." 
However, Nogay noted the lack of organization among all the groups within the Gezi Park protesters and he fears their demands would not be fully relayed. 
Nogay also said that he had seen people who pretended to be peaceful protesters but engaged in violence during confrontations with the police. He said he believes they trying to assist the government to show Gezi Park protests as illegitimate and unlawful. 
Correpsondent Erisa Dautaj Senerdem in Istanbul contributed to this report.  
How do you feel Turkey should react to criticism by the EU and others? Share your thoughts in the comment section below.  
