07/03/2007
(AP, Eux.tv, Euronews, Bloomberg, DPA - 06/03/07)
The EU said on Tuesday (March 6th) that Serbia could become a possible candidate country next year. The announcement was made during Serbian President Boris Tadic's visit to Brussels this week. However, following talks with Tadic, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said the country must show "concrete and convincing actions that must lead to full co-operation" with the international war crimes court in The Hague. 
"Achieving candidate status in 2008 is ambitious, but under the best circumstances it can be possible," Rehn said. 
The halt in the country's Stablisation and Association Agreement negotiations with the Union almost ten months ago were a direct result Serbia's lack of co-operation with the war crimes court. On May 3rd, 2006 Rehn told the Serbian public that the talks were cut off because fugitive Ratko Mladic had not been arrested. 
To restart negotiations -- and take the first step to becoming a candidate country -- Serbia must submit a proposal outlining a clear commitment to arrest Mladic and other key suspects. According to Rehn, the plan must include ensuring that "competent personnel" are in position to ensure co-operation. 
Tadic said that co-operation with The Hague will be the new government's "number one" priority. 
"I really believe that all indictees have to be in The Hague," Tadic said, adding that he plans to form the new government "with European intentions" by the end of the month. 
"We are not going to be part of the European problem," Tadic told reporters after meeting EU officials. "We would like to be part of the European solution.'' 
Some analysts say the Union is easing its stance towards Serbia in light of the anticipated loss of Kosovo, which is expected to move towards sovereignty if the UN approves a status plan put forward by envoy Martti Ahtisaari. 
Tadic said Serbia could never approve of Kosovo's independence but would respect any international decision on its future. "We are not going to make war," he said. 
Not all EU members approve of taking a softer line, however. Last week Belgium insisted that it would oppose any further steps towards Serbia's accession until the country demonstrates it is serious about war crimes co-operation. 
During his visit, Tadic also received the support of EU ministers for forming a coalition government. The Union hopes that Tadic's Democratic Party will be able to strike a deal on the new cabinet with Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Serbian Democratic Party, an official said. 
"We want to encourage Europe-oriented parties to form a new government ... so the country can leave its nationalist past behind and embrace a European future," Rehn said. 
The Serbian president is hoping to have the new government formed before the UN makes a decision on the Kosovo status plan, which topped the agenda of Tadic's meeting with EU security chief Javier Solana. 
The talks in Brussels precede a final conference in Vienna on Saturday between the leaders of Serbia and Kosovo's ethnic Albanians, who will discuss Ahtisaari's plan. 
