15/08/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 15/08/05
Enormous progress in regional co-operation between South East European countries has been evident in the past four years, following the end of armed conflict. Through mutual aspiration to become EU and NATO members, the region's states are developing a new climate of relations in every area, assisted by international institutions. Further spurring the process are initiatives such as the EU's Stability Pact, the Central European Initiative (CEI), CEFTA, the South East European Co-operation Process (SEECP), NATO’s Partnership for Peace programme, the EU Stabilisation and Association Process (SAP), the Adriatic Charter, and the Initiative for Co-operation in Southeast Europe. 
"The United States and the EU share the goal of progressively integrating the Balkan countries into the Euro-Atlantic structures, as reaffirmed at the 2004 NATO summit in Istanbul," the US State Department said in fact sheet released last spring. "The values of democracy, the rule of law, respect for human and minority rights, and a market economy constitute the foundations of the Euro-Atlantic community. The pace of integration lies in the hands of the countries of the region." 
Washington has given its backing to the Adriatic Charter, an initiative launched by Albania, Croatia and Macedonia intended to co-ordinate efforts towards NATO membership. The three charter signatories have committed themselves to co-operation and exchange of information and experience in the hopes of furthering their shared goal. Many joint military manoeuvres have been held, training officers have been exchanged, and a network for improved communication has been established. As a result, say Macedonian Defence Ministry officials, co-ordination and exchange of data have been essentially improved, and the odds for NATO membership have risen substantially. 
The EU, meanwhile, carries out its regional co-operation policy through concrete assistance programmes. The regional CARDS programme has been sponsoring cross-border co-operation -- that is, projects beneficial for both parties in a border region. In October 2001, the European Commission adopted the "CARDS Regional Strategy Paper", a strategy for programming 197m euros in assistance over the period of three years. The aid is focused on tackling regional problems in the western Balkans and on raising levels of regional co-operation. Among the main priorities are management of international borders, regional infrastructure development and helping the countries build stronger national institutions. 
"Regional co-operation is a critical component within the SAP, essentially extending the EU's own philosophy to the Western Balkan region that deeper co-operation with neighbouring countries is a route to national as well as regional stability and growth and that such co-operation serves the mutual interests of all countries concerned," the EU said in a statement. "Some 10 per cent of the available CARDS budget will be directed to supporting this regional co-operation component -- totaling, in the period from 2002-2004, 197m euros," it added. 
The importance of co-operation is increasingly being emphasised by regional leaders. As far back as three years ago, Croatian President Stipe Mesic argued -- during an RFE/RL panel held on 21 November 2002 -- that NATO membership would make the countries of the region participants in a security system and help develop values and standards that would improve their chances for EU membership. He added that the EU -- particularly through the example of Franco-German reconciliation -- has shown that it is possible to end Europe's age-old problem of frequent wars for territory or political gain. 
"Regional policy is one of the key preconditions for the Balkans' joining the EU," President Branko Crvenkovski said at a summit in Mamaya, Romania last year. "Macedonia has always seen its interest whether it is signing free trade agreements with neighbours and creating conditions for a much more liberal trade of goods and services or in the so-called Adriatic Charter where we have defined the common regional priorities for NATO membership together with Albania and Croatia." 
More recently, Romanian President Traian Basescu emphasised the subject during his address to the 8th SEECP summit in Bucharest on 11 May. "Our European partners attach a great significance to the regional integration processes in the Balkans, such as the common energy market or the regional network of Free Trade Agreements," he said."We firmly believe that regional stability and prosperity cannot be obtained without regional solidarity." 
Certainly the past four years have witnessed dramatic changes in attitude. One example is the joint statement issued in Salzburg on 22 May 2003, by the presidents of Serbia-Montenegro and Croatia -- Svetozar Marovic and Mesic respectively -- together with their Bosnian counterpart, Borislav Paravac. The leaders agreed that their countries, as part of efforts to overcome the legacy of conflict, would step up efforts for determining the fate of missing persons and would do everything to stimulate the voluntary return of refugees, expelled and displaced persons and their property. They also underscored their "attachment to continuing and strengthening regional co-operation". 
Nevertheless, experts agree that the results should improve. They say the region is entering a phase where policy of regional co-operation is accepted by everybody. But now a period is coming where specific problems -- including refugee returns and guarantees for their security, the signing of free trade agreements, and the exchange of security and anti-terrorist information -- should be resolved. The list is a long one, and the political will must be maintained, taking advantage of the fact that moderate politicians are in office. They need to achieve results that will be verified by NATO and the EU. Otherwise, the momentum could be lost, experts say. 
Addressing the European Plenary Session in Strasbourg on 13 April, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said that 2005 and 2006 will be the crucial years for the Western Balkans in relation to the EU. Among the specific priority areas for the international community are the fight against illegal trade and organised crime, improved border controls, strengthened transparency, environmental regulation, a regional strategy for growth and stability, economic development, and the building of mutual confidence in security and defence. 
"Although there are difficulties and pitfalls on the Western Balkans’ road to Europe, most countries are currently making steady progress. These countries are struggling to reform antiquated economies, and to build modern societies based on respect for human rights and the rule of law, while at the same time dealing with the legacy of war," Rehn said. "Good-neighbourly relations and regional economic co-operation are the very essence of the EU ... they are the catalyst for stability, reconciliation, and normalising political relations," he added. 
