22/02/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 22/02/05
According to the latest research conducted by the Centre for Alternative Studies, young people in Serbia face a series of difficulties, including unemployment, low wages, housing shortages, a worrisome economic outlook and obstacles to career development. These factors are leading to a brain drain in the country. 
In the past, around 300,000 young people left Serbia each year, including about 8 per cent of the top university students. That figure rose significantly by 2003, while a new poll conducted among 3,200 young people between the ages of 16 and 35 found that as many as 43 per cent are ready to leave if they find the opportunity to do so. 
In a bid to slow this trend, university students have established the Association of Serbia's Best Students, which helps young people obtain scholarships. Another organisation, the Centre for Child Care, awarded 73 scholarships last year, with only two recipients later choosing to leave the country. Next year, the Centre plans to sell advertising space on billboards along principal highways, using the proceeds to finance stipends for top students. 
Branislav Aleksic, a student of electrical engineering, says he will not stay unless Serbia can provide him with a better life. "In all other countries children are nurtured from the beginning and everything is invested in them," Aleksic says, adding that Serbs should expect no less from their country. 
Similar sentiments are expressed by Andjelka Zecevic, a mathematics student. Although she loves her city and her friends, Zecevic says, "Unless the climate changes, I will be forced to leave." 
According to Srecko Mihajlovic, a prominent sociologist, young people in Serbia are often slow to become mature adults, becoming stuck instead in an "extended youth" as a result of absent opportunity and lack of encouragement. "Society leaves them in diapers until the fourth decade," Mihajlovic says. 
Another sociologist, Smiljka Tomanovic, has done extensive research into the situation of young people. She concludes that the basic requirement for individualisation -- independence from parents -- is generally missing in Serbia. As a result, many young people evolve a strategy of postponement, delaying everything from university studies to finding a job, getting married and having children. Surveys have found that 77 per cent of unmarried young men and women live with their parents, and even those who do get married are likely to become part of extended parental family structures -- which, researchers say, are frequently burdened by conflicts and even violence. 
Research into these issues is hampered by apathy and lack of funding, Tomanovic says, adding that she hopes the recent survey results will "inspire those who hold power in society to drop down from the ideological level to the practical level of doing something for young people". 
