28/01/2005
(Institute for War and Peace Reporting - 27/01/05)
Describing 2005 as critical for her country's Euro-Atlantic integration aspirations, Macedonian Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska has outlined some of the tasks the Balkan nation will focus on in the coming months. 
"Macedonia will deliver its 14,000-page-long list of answers to an EC questionnaire in Brussels on 14 February -- which will provide the equivalent of an X-ray of Macedonia's present circumstances, and of the reforms that it envisages," Sekerinska wrote in a comment published by the Institute for War and Peace Reporting on Thursday (27 January). 
The country submitted its application for EU membership last year and is hoping to be given an EU candidate status in 2006, when it also hopes to receive an invitation to join NATO. 
Addressing the European Parliament's foreign affairs committee, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said that once the replies are received, the EC will start drafting its opinion, which "might be put on the agenda of the December European Council". If Macedonia remains on the course of positive political development, it could join Croatia and Turkey as an official EU candidate, the commissioner said. 
But sending the questionnaire to Brussels is not the end of the story, Sekerinska warned, noting that difficult reforms lie ahead. 
"The country needs to show it possesses both stable institutions and a sound legal system," the deputy prime minister said. "It will have to direct much of its energy and resources towards further reforms and improving performance." 
 Local elections in March, she said, will provide a test of democratic principles and respect for the rule of law. The authorities will have to prove their capacity to organise a fair and democratic vote, she added, noting that Skopje has already invited foreign and local election observers to monitor the process. 
Other challenges include reforming the judiciary and setting out a long-term plan to map out the country's route towards sustainable economic development within a competitive EU market. 
Another important project will be the development of a national programme for the adoption of the acquis, setting out the exact timeframe within which Macedonia will be able to bring its economy and legislation fully in line with EU standards and regulations. 
In the context of the country's NATO bid, Macedonia is accelerating and finalising its army reforms, the minister said. This will allow the country to meet NATO requirements, setting the stage also for a better co-operation between the Macedonian armed forces and those of the Alliance. 
Further progress towards EU and NATO membership would benefit the entire region and would provide additional guarantees against potential regional security challenges in the future, Sekerinska said. 
"It will show also that [integration] is achievable only by abiding by the principles of democracy, tolerance and the rule of law -- and this applies especially to Balkan states that have gone through the hardships of ethnic division and conflict," she added. 
