02/04/2009
(AP, SNA, Zaman - 02/04/09; Reuters, AFP, Euronews, Euobserver, Xinhua, Dnevnik, Mediapool - 01/04/09)
A powerful blast on a main transit pipeline in Moldova disrupted Russian natural gas supplies to Bulgaria and Turkey on Wednesday (April 1st) and forced a reduction of gas deliveries. 
The explosion occurred in Moldova's separatist Transdniestria region in the morning, damaging one of the three pipelines carrying Russian gas via Ukraine and Moldova to Romania, Bulgaria and Turkey. 
The Moldovan authorities ruled out any terrorist act. Instead, they blamed the incident on old, poorly maintained equipment, likely damaged by a landslide. 
The blast was reportedly audible 10km away. 
The AP cited Moldovan officials on Thursday saying that 30m of the pipeline ruptured and requires replacement. Aleksandr Gusev, head of Moldova-Gaz, predicted completion of repairs within three days. 
"I can confirm there was an explosion on a gas pipeline near [the Transdniestrian capital of] Tiraspol," Moldovan government spokesman Vitalie Condratchi said. Prime Minister Zinaida Greceanii has convened a meeting of the state emergencies committee, he said. 
Bulgarian officials said the volume of gas flowing into the country's pipeline network kept changing after the blast. In January, the country experienced a complete halt in gas supplies because of the Russia-Ukraine dispute over gas prices and transit fees. 
Angel Semerdzhiev, head of Bulgartransgaz, said the daily drop in gas supplies was from 50% to 70%. 
He predicted restoration of full supplies in three days, saying Bulgaria would tap reserves at its Chiren storage facility to fill the gap. Semerdzhiev denied earlier reports that Ukraine's Naftogaz had fully restored gas supplies the previous afternoon. 
 "I don't know whether there are countries whose supplies have been restored to 90%, but this is not the case in Bulgaria," the Sofia News Agency quoted him as saying. 
Turkey also experienced an unspecified drop in gas deliveries, while Romania said it experienced no problems, according to the Turkish daily Zaman. 
The explosion in Moldova highlighted the need for better protection of the pipelines, Jacek Saryusz-Wolski, chairman of the EP's foreign affairs committee, told EUobserver. "It is a question of European energy security, and the EU should consider involving itself in Moldova in the modernisation, just as it did in Ukraine," said Saryusz-Wolski. 
The EU reached an agreement with Ukraine last week to help modernise the latter's 13,500km pipeline system. 
