07/03/2008
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 07/03/08
European Commission Vice President Franco Frattini's visit to Macedonia in February marked the start of visa regime liberalisation between the EU and Macedonia. Frattini said if the Macedonian government continues at this pace, the plan to finalise this liberalisation may be in place by the end of the year. 
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said the government has made all necessary preparations to start easing the visa regime. 
 "This change is in the interest of the citizens and the country as a whole that has waited for visa regime abolishment for the past 17 years. I am hopeful that, in the upcoming negotiations, Macedonian citizens will be able to sense that they are becoming a part of Europe," said Gruevski. 
He also said that all technical conditions for the start of negotiations are complete. New biometric passports and ID cards were issued several months ago, the visa-migration policy was harmonised with acquis communautaire -- the total body of EU law accumulated thus far, a system of integrated border management was established, and the Macedonian government successfully addressed illegal migration, human trafficking and organised crime. 
Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Gabriela Konevska-Trajkovska said the government not only worked to meet the Brussels criteria, but also to ensure a better life for Macedonian citizens. 
During Frattini's visit, the National Visa Centre, which will be fully operational by the end of the year, opened at the foreign ministry. 
"The Centre will make its first contact with the Macedonian Consulate in Thessalonica and with the Macedonian Embassy in Ljubljana as a token of appreciation for the current EU Slovenian presidency," said Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki. 
 Under a previous agreement with the EU, Macedonian journalists, civil servants and business travellers have had their visas facilitated since January as a part of the visa regime package. These citizens received their visas free of charge. 
