23/08/2010
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 23/08/10
Montenegro adopted a new anti-corruption strategy and action plan in the fight against corruption and organised crime last month, but the government is now facing criticism from NGO representatives, who say they were not consulted. 
Montenegro's Network for Affirmation of NGO Sector (MANS) called the new plan frivolous and unrealistic, too quickly drafted by Minister for European Integration Gordana Djurovic. 
"The reforms envisaged in the action plan will not be able to provide concrete results, because they are not based on real problems. The action plan was secretly written by Minister Djurovic without the input of the working group members who were mandated to work on the document, and without a public debate," said MANS Director Vanja Calovic. 
The plan was drafted after the European Commission (EC) criticised the government's strategy to fight corruption and organised crime on July 17th. The EC reportedly concluded that the plan lacked a main goal, deadlines and monitoring mechanisms. 
The new draft includes measures to combat cyber crime, credit-card fraud and merchandise counterfeiting. The new framework will boost Montenegro's co-operation with neighbouring countries and will foster region-based witness protection programmes. 
Calovic said that Djurovic drafted the action plan in a week, while "the previous plans took a ten-member working group four months, more than 40 meetings, and a public debate." 
Djurovic retorted that the NGOs criticising the government should participate in elections, and thus gain legitimacy for their criticism, indirectly accusing MANS of trying to block Montenegro's European path. 
"Some NGOs are not satisfied, because their suggestions are not 100% accepted," she said. 
In early August, Djurovic gave the document to the EU delegation in Podgorica, as the EC prepares its opinion on Montenegro's readiness as a Union candidate. 
MANS submitted its anti-corruption strategy on August 8th. 
The question remains whether the government's strategy and action plan can affect the credibility of the document and reputation of Montenegro's government in Brussels. 
Former Montenegrin diplomat to the EU Bojan Sarkic says that much depends on the EC's opinion of Montenegro's readiness as a candidate member. 
"The main and only medium in the process of approaching the EU is the government of Montenegro," Sarkic told SETimes. He said he does not expect any negative remarks from the EC on the document. 
"The EC can point to certain shortcomings in the document and request an update, correction, or other changes. That isn't negative; on the contrary, it may be one of, as they call them, 'identified weaknesses' that must be removed within the prescribed time," Sarkic said. 
