19/12/2006
By Nedjeljko Nudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 19/12/06
Montenegrin officers and soldiers may soon be heading to the United States for training. On December 7th, the newly independent country joined the State Partnership Programme (SPP), which pairs 55 countries with the National Guard in various US states and territories. Montenegro is partnering with Maine. 
"This is an historic step which will start strong bilateral partnership in the defence field between Montenegro and the United States," US National Guard Director Steven Blum said as he marked the occasion. 
"I'm very glad about the co-operation between the state of Maine and the state of Montenegro. It will further strengthen the co-operation as a whole between Montenegro and the United States," said Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic. 
The SPP allows Montenegrin officers, non-commissioned officers and soldiers to receive training in Maine. Reciprocal exchanges of soldiers and experiences will take place, along with military unit co-operation and civil sector experience exchanges. Emergency response and coastal management are two areas of particular interest. 
According to a report by the American Forces Press Services, the Maine National Guard can potentially advise the Montenegrin military as it makes the transition from a conscription-based to an all-volunteer force, reduces its troop numbers and upgrades its Yugoslav-era equipment. 
"Both of our nations share common goals of democracy, responsible global conduct and strong national security," Blum said. 
Montenegro's military needs US support and assistance in meeting its international obligations, said the chief of general staff of the Montenegrin Armed Forces, General Jovan Lakcevic. "In Maine we see a partner that will help us to accomplish all our tasks," he said. 
Following meetings with Vujanovic, Defence Minister Boro Vucinic and Foreign Minister Milan Rocen, Blum and his delegation attended a joint police Special Anti-terrorist Unit brigade exercise at the Danilovgrad Barracks. Using helicopters, members of the elite unit demonstrated parts of their drill. 
Blum gave "very good" marks to the Montenegrin soldiers and equipment. "This is excellent progress and a very good unit. This is really something that a newly independent state army should do. They have leaders with vision and General Lakcevic leads this force in the right direction. It will be model in the region, with regard to stability," Blum said. 
Co-operation between the US National Guard and Montenegro's military will be boosted further once the two countries sign a Status of Forces Agreement and reach a deal on use of infrastructure, both sides noted. 
