03/01/2007
(FT, AKI - 02/01/07; AP - 01/01/07; Blic, AP - 31/12/06; B92 - 30/12/06; AKI - 27/12/06; Balkan Insight, Transitions Online - 21/12/06; B92 - 16/12/06)
A day after her country took over the rotating EU presidency, German Chancellor Angela Merkel voiced hope Tuesday (January 2nd) that this month's parliamentary elections in Serbia would strengthen the country's democratic forces. 
"Our first interest is that the election in Serbia on January 21st reinforces the democratic camp," she said in an interview with the British daily Financial Times. "Serbia is the most important country in the region. Without a stable Serbia there will be no peace there." 
Latest polls indicate that President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DS) will finish second, behind the ultra nationalist Serbian Radical Party (SRS). The coalition around Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) is expected to end up third. 
Both the DS and the DSS have cited EU integration as a priority. 
But three weeks before the elections, which will determine the country's future for years to come, the leaders of the two biggest democratic parties appear divided in their views on the makeup of the future government. 
"The mandate is being given to a political party having the largest potential to form the government," Tadic said in an interview with Belgrade based daily Blic, published on December 31st. "My constitutional obligation is to first carry out consultations with the leaders of the lists that entered the parliament. After that I will assess which political party has the largest coalition potential." 
Citing recent poll results, Tadic said he expected the DS to win 30% of the vote and the DSS-led coalition about 18%. If so, he said, the mandate for forming a government should go to his party, which has several yet undisclosed candidates for the prime minister's post. Tadic said his own name was not on the list. 
Kostunica has made clear his aspirations for a new term as prime minister and has hinted that his party would only enter a government coalition if he were given that role. However, he has not stated his party's stance on possible coalition partners. 
Tadic urged Kostunica and the DSS to make it clear that they would not enter into a government with the SRS, whose leader, Vojislav Seselj, is on trial at The Hague tribunal. "If it is all the same for the DSS whether it shall form a coalition government with the radicals or with the DS, then the DSS cannot be our coalition partner nor can we build together a European future for Serbia," the president said. 
Regarding the key issue of Kosovo, Kostunica and Tadic have both said they oppose independence for the province. On Monday, the prime minister visited the ethnically divided city of Mitrovica and again pledged to prevent Kosovo's secession. 
"Kosovo is the most precious part of Serbia," the AP quoted Kostunica as saying at a gathering attended by several hundred Kosovo Serbs. "Preserving Kosovo [as part of Serbia] is vital to Serbia's future." 
A report by the International Crisis group last month described a four-party coalition led by the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), which is not represented in parliament, as the only force in Serbia with "a clear pro-European attitude and a realistic Kosovo policy". LDP leader and former Deputy Prime Minister Cedomir Jovanovic supports Kosovo's independence. 
