10/03/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 10/03/11
A growing trade deficit continues to adversely affect Kosovo's frail economy, yet experts say the best remedy -- export growth -- is not yet on the horizon. Achieving it, they say, requires a long-term commitment. 
 "In other countries in transition, exports were dependent on, and coupled with, investments. Foreign investors are primarily attracted to those areas that involve exports. Therefore, Kosovo should liberalise and increase transparency and legality in potential sectors such as mining, telecommunications and tourism," Kosovo's American Chamber of Commerce head Leke Musa said. 
He argues the deficit is a result of Kosovo's inability to compete in this sector, as well as mistakes made. He is skeptical government subsidies can produce results. 
 "The trade deficit is a direct consequence of the lack of an industrial base in Kosovo. Solving this problem should definitely not [entail] protectionist measures because they are mostly short-term in nature and do not produce results," Musa said 
Statistical Office data shows that the country exported only 13% of what it imported in 2010. In December alone, the deficit exceeded 183m euros. 
"According to the key export groups, 66% are base metals and related articles, and 14.4% are mineral products," Statistics Office of Kosovo Export Division head Ismajl Sahiti said. 
He added that Kosovo mostly imports from Serbia, Macedonia, Turkey, Germany and China, and mostly exports to Italy, Albania, Serbia and Macedonia. 
Kosovo Customs data confirms the imbalance. "Kosovo's export of goods amounted to nearly 300m euros, while imports of foreign goods were around 2 billion euros," Customs spokeperson Adriatik Stavileci said. 
Economists say high deficit levels severely undermine the local economy, as does the export of cash, which lowers the liquidity of the local economy and undermines the process of economic development. 
The favorable balance between exports and imports, therefore, is one of the key components for economic growth, they say. 
 While stimulation of foreign investment and domestic production are seen as two alternatives for reducing the trade deficit, the lack of a trade agreement with the EU hampers potential export growth with the Union. 
"The trade agreement with the EU has applied autonomous preferential trade measures in Kosovo, which means Kosovo exporters were exempted from customs duties in the case of export of their products in EU market," Trade and Industry Ministry official Flamur Keqa said. 
The preferential trade measures implemented by the EU expired on December 31st, 2010. 
Despite the setback, Berat Rukiqi of the Economic Chamber of Kosovo insists there is no alternative to developing economic policies to increase exports. 
"In all ways we should strive to reduce the trade deficit. One of the main objectives of economic policies should be to reduce the trade deficit and balance the import of goods, especially basic goods," he said. 
