31/08/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 31/08/07
Almost 15 years after they were taken, 74 Lipizzaner horses will be returned to Croatia. On Wednesday (August 29th), Serbian Agricultural Minister Slobodan Milosavljevic and his Croatian counterpart, Petar Cobankovic, signed an agreement that will bring the horses home. 
Once an elegant symbol of the Austro-Hungarian Court, the horses have been a continuing issue between Zagreb and Belgrade for more than a decade. Croatia insists that the herd was taken illegally from the country during the conflict in the region, and has been unwavering in demanding their return. 
More than 80 horses that lived on a farm in Lipik, Croatia, were taken to Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) in 1991. When the conflict ignited in BiH, the herd was moved to a farm in Vojvodina, Serbia. Some Croatian media reports claim the horses were stolen from the farm in Lipik, while other sources say the horses wandered across the border. 
After the war ended, Croatia asked for the Lipizzaners to be returned. But the owner of the Serbian farm where the horses now reside demanded 300,000 euros from the government for the return. Serbian officials encouraged the negotiations, saying that the matter should be resolved directly between the owner of the farm and the Croatian government. 
However, Croatia declined to pay the Serbian farmer, in part because of allegations that the horses were being neglected and mistreated. Croatian and Serbian media have, on a number of occasions, reported that the horses did not get enough food, that some of the horses have died and that they were generally in poor health. Photos of the horses have circulated widely. 
Prompted by these reports, Milosavljevic visited the herd earlier this month. "I am no expert to judge their condition, but they seem to be in a decent state," he told reporters. 
 Contrary to Milosavljevic's opinion, members of the Croatian Agricultural Ministry observed that the horses were indeed starving and in poor health, and relaunched negotiations with their Serbian counterparts to bring the herd home. 
Nothing has been said publicly about any financial compensation the farm owner may receive. A team of experts will visit the farm to exactly determine how many horses can be transferred immediately to Croatia. 
"After they visit the farm, we will continue with the process of returning the Lipizzaner horses to Croatia," Milosavljevic said after Wednesday's meeting. Both delegations stressed that the matter will be solved and the horses will return to their original farm in Lipik. 
