15/07/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 15/07/10
Faith No More, Mika, the Chemical Brothers and Placebo were just some of the highlights of this year's Exit Festival in Novi Sad. In all, 600 performers on 20 stages thrilled the crowds at the Petrovaradin Fortress between July 8th and 11th. 
Exit is one of Serbia's best-known events, attracting fans from around the world. Organisers say the greatest number of visitors came from Western Europe this year. 
British music lovers are traditionally loyal to Exit. Around 10,000 visitors from the United Kingdom showed up this time. Many came to Novi Sad days before the event and planned to stay on afterwards. Music, they say, is not Serbia's only attraction. 
 "The pljeskavica burger patties are incredibly tasty," Paul, 29, of London said. "I've also tried the honey brandy. I think I'll take at least one bottle back to London. I've noticed everything in Serbia is pretty cheap." 
"This is my third time here; the atmosphere is always phenomenal," said Joshua, a 27-year-old Londoner, adding that Exit is a great opportunity to meet people from different parts of the world. 
 "The concerts are great, but it seems like it's even better at the parties thrown here at the camp. We've met Serbs who are completely nuts and can have a really good time. Some Hungarians from Szeged are in the tent next to ours and they're cool too." 
Fans from around the Balkans were there too. The musical lineup featured several regional bands, such as Novi Sad-based Ringispil, Repetitor from Belgrade, Lollobrigida from Croatia, and Elvis Jackson from Slovenia. 
Marko, 21, of Croatia came to the festival for the first time. 
"I will buy tickets for the next year's Exit as early as tomorrow," he said. "I loved Serbian girls the most; they're gorgeous." 
Dalibor, a 24-year-old from Sarajevo, was at Exit for the fourth time in a row. "I think Mika gave the most entertaining performance. He communicated so well with the crowd," he said. "Faith No More were also amazing; their gig was explosive." 
"This year's lineup isn't exactly according to my taste, but I'm here for the fun and the crowd and I’m not regretting it," said fellow Sarajevan Mirza, 24. 
