14/12/2005
By Ambassador Lawrence E. Butler for Southeast European Times – 14/12/05
Every country that has successfully completed the transition to the free market has been engaged in a race -- how quickly after the disruptions and sacrifices that come in the wake of economic reforms can you deliver the benefits of those same reforms to citizens. 
If the time lag is too large, the reform process will stall. If there are no tangible dividends -- new jobs, better services, higher living standards -- the reform process will collapse. 
This is a paradigm that can be identified today across Southeast Europe, just as it existed throughout Central Europe during the 1990s. 
The countries in this region are in a race to prosperity, and the fortunes of millions of citizens depend on the outcome of that race. 
Since 25 November, when BiH and the EU launched Stabilisation and Association talks, BiH has joined its neighbours on the highway to Euro-Atlantic integration. It is at last part of the transition mainstream. 
We should keep in mind the important fact that the progress towards EU and NATO accession doesn’t just mean that countries in the south and east are increasingly oriented towards countries in the north and west. Yes, Southeast Europe is moving closer to the EU, but at the same time the countries of Southeast Europe are moving closer to each other. Through the enactment and implementation of key reforms aimed at meeting European standards, the Southeast European economies are being made increasingly compatible with one another, and capable of competing productively with one another. They are adopting similar commercial and consumer standards, similar business environment structures, similar investment rules and labour regulations. 
BiH has now enacted and is in the process of implementing a swathe of strategic economic reforms that will allow it to take advantage of regional economic opportunities. These reforms include unifying and rationalising the customs service, streamlining the company registration process, establishing commercial courts to speed up business litigation, bringing regulation in the utilities sector up to European standards, and improving corporate governance at public companies. Banking reform, initiated in the late 1990s, has already created a robust financial sector: interest rates are down to around 10 per cent and banks are increasingly willing to lend to small and medium enterprises – generally viewed as the backbone of future economic growth. 
Results of these and other reforms have been substantial. Inflation remains negligible and the industrial production, investment and export indices are all up. 
The free trade agreements negotiated under Stability Pact auspices are already well on the way to creating a single Southeast European market of 55 million people. This market represents a platform on which companies can develop and consolidate their products and services before breaking into the larger market of the EU. 
The clear convergence of interest that now exists among countries in the region is particularly important to BiH in view of its recent history. 
Serbia and Montenegro and Croatia are locked into the Euro-integration process. Their success will be predicated on their good neighbourly support for BiH, and BiH’s progress will be hugely assisted by the co-operation that is now being developed and expanded between itself and its nearest neighbours. 
The focus for BiH during 2006 must be on sustaining and expanding the benefits that economic reforms can deliver. More jobs are being created, but a real unemployment rate of around 18 per cent is socially unsustainable. This figure must be brought down more quickly. Investment is increasing, but BiH must further improve its business environment: investment opportunities are not being identified and marketed effectively, and local authorities, particularly at the municipal level, are not yet competing aggressively enough for commercial funds. 
However, there is a cumulative and, I believe, now unstoppable trend that will sustain and promote further improvements in the business and investment environment. The legislative building blocks are largely in place. Entrepreneurs can now get on with the business of creating wealth and generating new jobs -- as this pattern becomes established in the public mind, it becomes easier to introduce more reforms and the virtuous cycle of reform and economic growth is then established. 
The introduction of VAT on 1 January 2006 is a case in point. Restructuring the fiscal system has strained the administrative and political fabric of countries with greater resources than BiH -- but the potential positive impact on the economy and on the wellbeing of citizens of this fiscal restructuring is enormous. It will make revenue collection fairer and more effective; it will help bring large sections of the grey economy into the regular economy; it will reduce opportunities for corruption; and it will increase resources that can be spent on public services. 
By the end of 2006 the benefits of VAT should be visible to all. 
I am writing during a period that has been dominated by retrospective surveys of BiH’s progress prompted by the tenth anniversary of the Dayton-Paris accords. Yet the urgent preoccupations of this country are now very much related to overcoming those obstacles that still remain on the highway to Europe, rather than dwelling on the difficult and uneven road that has got us to where we are. 
That is a remarkable testament to the success of the Dayton-Paris accords -- they have brought BiH to a point where the accords themselves are no longer the determining factor in BiH’s political, economic and social stability. The positive potential of the future exerts a greater influence on public debate than baleful memories of the past. 
The people of BiH have had to travel a long and difficult road since the early 1990s, but today they are traveling together with their neighbours on the highway to Europe. Ten years after Dayton, transition is beginning to deliver results. 
What we now want to see is an acceleration in the race to prosperity. 
Ambassador Lawrence E. Butler is the Principal Deputy High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina 
