12/04/2006
(Euronews, Blic - 12/04/06; Reuters, AP, BETA, Serbian Government, Makfax - 11/04/06)
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica suggested on Tuesday (11 April) that the Belgrade authorities will soon move to arrest key war crimes fugitive Ratko Mladic and deliver him to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
Full co-operation with the UN tribunal in The Hague, including the handover of the former Bosnian Serb military commander, is a precondition Serbia must meet to move ahead on its EU integration path. Brussels has given Belgrade until 30 April to fulfil that obligation or risk seeing its Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) talks with the EU put on hold. 
"We are now very, very close to responding to this obligation so as to be able to accelerate our path towards Europe," Kostunica told reporters in Paris on Tuesday after a meeting with French President Jacques Chirac. "We will do everything to co-operate. Serbia will do all it can, right to the end, to achieve this." 
It was the second time in the last two weeks that the prime minister has pledged Belgrade's commitment to a quick resolution of Mladic's case. Facing an EU threat to suspend the SAA talks, Kostunica promised chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte late last month that the fugitive would be arrested and turned over "without delay". 
Mladic was first indicted by the ICTY in 1995 for involvement in war crimes committed during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He faces 13 counts of crimes against humanity and violation of the laws or customs of war and two counts of genocide, including for the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo. Mladic has been on the run for ten years now and is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia, where he lived under military protection until 2002. 
Other issues the French and Serbian leaders discussed on Tuesday included the future of the Serbia-Montenegro state union, the country's EU accession efforts, and the UN-led negotiations on Kosovo's future status. 
Chirac said France was asking all sides in the Kosovo status talks to seek a lasting solution that would respect each side's legitimate interests, the Serbian news agency BETA reported, citing a statement circulated by the French embassy in Belgrade. 
Legally still part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been under UN administration since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict. The Kosovo Albanians, who make up 90 per cent of the province's population of 2 million people, hope that the UN-led negotiations will lead to full independence from Serbia. Belgrade and the Kosovo Serbs want Kosovo to remain part of Serbia. 
Reiterating Belgrade's stance, Kostunica on Tuesday called for a compromise "halfway between the pre-1999 status on the one hand and an independent Kosovo on the other". 
