18/05/2006
(The Times - 18/05/06; AFP, Reuters, AP, Turkish Press - 17/05/06)
Turkey must step up reforms now or face a possible halt to its accession talks later this year, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn warned on Wednesday (17 May). 
"It is necessary that the Turkish government take immediate action to restart the momentum of the reforms in the country," Rehn said at a news conference in Sofia. "That is the best and only way to avoid a train crash later this year in the negotiations between the EU and Turkey. It's really in the hands of the Turkish government, parliament and civil society to achieve results." 
Amid scepticism among some EU members, the 25-nation bloc opened membership talks with the mainly Muslim country on 3 October 2005. The talks are due to resume later this year. 
Rehn's remarks reflect a concern in European capitals that with Ankara now focusing mainly on the recent surge in violence in Turkey's predominantly Kurdish southeast, it is backtracking on promised reforms. Meanwhile, analysts say, the initial euphoria in Turkey over the launch of talks has dissipated, giving way to disillusionment and a growing nationalism. 
The enlargement commissioner's warning came a day after the European Commission's (EC) move to delay a final decision on whether Bulgaria and Romania can join the EU in 2007. The postponement is intended to push the two countries towards meeting their accession commitments. According to Rehn, it should also be seen by Ankara as a signal that it needs to redouble its reform efforts. 
One example of a continuing sticking point, according to Reuters, is a section of Turkey's amended penal code, under which a number of academics, journalists and intellectuals have faced trial for criticising state institutions or for "insulting Turkishness". 
Another problem is Cyprus. To get the EU's green light for its talks, Turkey signed a protocol in July 2005, extending its customs agreement with the Union to the ten countries that joined the bloc in May 2004, including Cyprus. But it also issued a declaration, stating that the signing of the protocol did not imply a recognition of the Greek Cypriot administration. 
The Turkish Parliament has not ratified the Ankara protocol yet and Greek Cypriot planes and ships have so far been refused access to Turkish airports and ports. 
"We will not bring the additional protocol to our parliament unless isolation of Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus is ended," Prime Minster Recep Tayyip Erdogan said in Ankara on Wednesday, speaking at a joint press conference with visiting Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen. Finland assumes the rotating EU presidency on 1 July. 
It is wrong "to add political criteria or political developments to the screening and negotiation processes," Erdogan said. 
