15/12/2004
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 15/12/04
Belgrade's lack of co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) is threatening to destabilise the state union of Serbia-Montenegro, federal president Svetozar Marovic warned recently. In failing to meet its obligations to The Hague, he said, Serbia is also endangering the state union's prospects for EU integration. 
 Failure to co-operate "directly jeopardises the European future of Serbia-Montenegro, as well as the stability and survival of the common state", Marovic said, charging that certain "political forces" within Serbia are largely to blame. 
EU security chief Javier Solana, who was briefed by Marovic on the situation in Serbia-Montenegro, agreed that the actions of some Serbian government ministries are blocking progress. He warned that the co-operation issue is throwing into question the likelihood of a feasibility study on Serbia-Montenegro's association with the EU. 
On 10 December, the Serbia-Montenegro Council for European Integration met to try to forge a breakthrough. Marovic and federal Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic attended, along with the Serbian and Montenegrin presidents, prime ministers and other top political figures. 
According to Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, the council agreed that generals sought by the ICTY should be given a deadline for surrender, measured in weeks, not months. Calling the meeting very successful, Labus said the atmosphere during the three-hour talks suggested a calming of tensions between Belgrade and Podgorica. 
During a visit to Brussels Tuesday (14 December), Marovic assured Solana that both constituent republics understand they must demonstrate a full commitment to meeting their international obligations before March 2005 -- the final deadline for obtaining a positive response from the EU concerning the feasibility study. Asked by reporters whether this meant that Serbia had pledged to arrest the ICTY indictees, Marovic said authorities had made "firm guarantees" that all obligations would be met. 
However, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has so far advocated only the voluntary surrender of indictees, and it is unclear what will happen if the indictees fail to turn themselves in. Jovan Simic, an adviser to Serbian President Boris Tadic, doubts the indictees will surrender anytime soon -- especially generals Sreten Lukic and Nebojsa Pavkovic, who have serious health problems. Tadic, meanwhile, has repeatedly stressed that co-operating with the ICTY is a prerequisite for Serbia's political stability, characterising failure to do so as "national treason". 
Draskovic has warned that the door to EU and NATO membership will remain shut as long as the indictees are not extradited to The Hague. Were its obligations to be met, he said, Serbia would stand a good chance of joining the Partnership for Peace programme quickly. 
Moreover, the issue of war crimes indictees is also blocking Serbia from taking its rightful place among European nations, Draskovic said. "Europe wants us, and our people deserve to join the EU and avoid the fate of being a black hole. Europe is waiting for us, but that waiting has its limits." 
