31/01/2005
(The New York Times, Turkish Daily News - 31/01/05; AFP, AP, Anadolu Agency, Turks.us - 30/01/05; FT - 27/01/05)
Veteran politician Deniz Baykal was re-elected Sunday (30 January) as head of the Republican People's Party (CHP). However, the party's extraordinary two-day convention revealed the deep division within Turkey's main opposition force. 
 The only other contender for Baykal's post was Mustafa Sarigul, the 48-year-old mayor of Istanbul's wealthy Sisli district. Baykal, 66, who has led the CHP over the past 12 years, was re-elected after 674 of the 1,219 delegates attending the congress voted for him. Under CHP rules, a candidate must be supported by at least 628 delegates to win the vote in the first round.. 
 The founder of the modern Turkish secular state and its first president, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, established the CHP in 1923. He led the party until 1938. During its 80-year history, the party has participated in coalition governments. Currently, it is the only other party represented in Turkey's assembly, besides the Justice and Development Party (AKP) of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. 
 In the 2004 municipal elections, the AKP won 41.5 per cent of the vote, while only 18 per cent of the voters backed the CHP. Many party members subsequently criticised Baykal's leadership, arguing that the CHP needs someone capable of modernising the party and its ideology. 
During a fiery speech, lasting more than two hours, at the opening of the congress Saturday, Baykal again levelled accusations of corruption against Sarigul, whom he had earlier tried to expel from the party. 
Contributing to the rising tension in the hall, Sarıgul tried to reach the lectern to respond to the CHP leader's allegations, without obtaining the congress council's permission. Fights then broke out, with delegates also throwing plastic chairs and other objects at one another. 
The weekend congress has left CHP supporters wondering about the party's future at a time when the AKP's popularity -- buoyed by good economic news and progress towards EU accession -- continues to rise. 
