28/04/2010
(The Sofia Echo - 28/04/10; Reuters, UN News Centre, Famagusta Gazette, Zaman, Focus News Agency - 27/04/10; World Bulletin - 25/04/10; AP, AFP - 23/04/10)
The Cyprus peace talks should pick up from where they left off before the recent election of new president of Turkish Cyprus Dervis Eroglu, says Alexander Downer, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's special adviser on the Mediterranean island. 
"It's our view that the process should continue on the basis of what has taken place so far," said Downer, the former Australian foreign minister who has been mediating negotiations between the leaders of the Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities. 
Speaking with reporters Tuesday (April 27th), Downer said "We don't want to see the process start all over again when so much has been achieved over the past 18 or so months." 
At the start of the talks in September 2008, Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and the recently defeated Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat agreed to work towards a comprehensive settlement to reunify the island into a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation with political equality. 
The two held more than 70 meetings before a break for this month's Turkish Cypriot presidential election, which the incumbent Talat lost to nationalist hardliner Eroglu. 
 In a joint statement following their final session last month, Christofias and Talat said they had achieved important progress in the areas of governance and power-sharing, along with issues key to the EU and the economy. Both voiced confidence that a comprehensive settlement is achievable. 
But Talat, a moderate pro-Europe and pro-reunification statesman, failed to win a second term. The victorious Eroglu had served for nearly 20 years as Turkish Cypriot prime minister before winning the presidency on April 18th. 
In his first public remarks since the election, Downer said his plan is to return to Cyprus at the weekend to discuss a date for the resumption of talks. He said that could happen as early as next month. 
"We would like to see that happen fairly soon," Reuters quoted Downer as saying. 
He also voiced hope that Christofias and Eroglu would bring the historic negotiations to a successful conclusion before too long. 
"This is not an indefinite process," the UN envoy stressed. "This is a process that needs to move forward -- at least to move forward with a good deal of momentum." 
Downer also stressed that any attempt to start the negotiations over again would indicate that progress achieved to date would be "wasted". 
His remarks follow reports that Eroglu -- often described as a hardliner opposed to reunification -- supports a "two-state solution" instead of reunification, and wants all issues covered so far to be re-examined. 
As he took office on Friday, however, the new Turkish Cypriot president stressed that he would not abandon the negotiations. He promised "to work for a just and durable" solution, based on the parameters recommended by the UN. 
"There is no reason why the talks should not succeed in reaching a settlement, as long as the Greek Cypriot side acts with goodwill," the AFP quoted Eroglu as saying on the day of his swearing-in. 
