02/06/2010
By Erol Izmirli for Southeast European Times in Istanbul and HK Tzanis in Athens -- 02/06/10
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan addressed Turkish lawmakers Tuesday (June 1st) regarding the Israeli attack on a flotilla carrying humanitarian aid to Gaza the day before. 
 "Israel's behaviour should definitely, definitely be punished," Erdogan said after cutting a visit to Chile short to return home. He said he would press Israel to remove the "inhumane embargo" on Gaza as soon as possible. 
In Washington, meanwhile, Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu warned the Middle East peace process was being undermined. "How can we count that we have a real partner who wants peace after they don't respect the citizens of a friendly country? How can we convince Syria or other countries in the region that Israel wants peace?" Davutoglu said. 
At least ten civilians, four of them Turks, were killed in the incident, with many more wounded. The situation, condemned by the international community, has further derailed ties between Israel and Ankara, once solid allies in the very unstable region. 
The Turkish civilian ship, the Blue Marmara, had around 560 volunteers on board. The aid convoy was composed of five more ships -- two under the Greek flag -- and volunteers from 32 countries. 
Turkey immediately withdrew its envoy to Israel and called off three military drills. In Greece, an ongoing joint Greek-Israeli air force exercise was immediately halted, and a high-profile visit by Israel's air force general staff chief -- who was to have observed the exercise -- has been cancelled. 
The Greek Foreign Ministry summoned the Israeli ambassador, Ali Yahya, for talks, while a contingency unit was activated at the ministry to deal with the Greek nationals and vessels involved. 
Speaking on Monday evening, Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou said the action by Israel's military "cannot be justified. It had tragic results and causes us profound sorrow." Greece's main opposition party, New Democracy, condemned the raid as unprovoked and in violation of international law. 
"It is obvious that actions by NGOs should be unhindered and extend beyond borders; any opinion vis-a-vis their legality should be determined by international bodies and not by any state unilaterally," a party spokesperson said. 
Turkey's three-pillar strategy  
 In the wake of all this, Ankara is preparing itself for a long-term diplomatic struggle with Israel, with three main dimensions -- international, legal and humanitarian. 
 "The incident was not something between Turkey and Israel, but rather was a matter for the world," Erdogan said. "Statements of condemnation are not enough. We [the international community] should get results." 
 NATO gathered its permanent representatives to discuss the issue, while the Organisation of Islamic Conference is set to convene on June 7th. 
On legal front, the measures Turkey is planning to take are more complicated. Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Arinc, an influential government official, said Turkish prosecutors have already started to look into whether Israel's boarding of a Turkish ship constituted a crime under the Turkish Penal Code. 
 "Raiding a ship is surely a crime. Though it's perpetrated in international waters, it's still a Turkish ship," he said. 
In Athens, meanwhile, a representative at the Israeli Embassy downplayed the impact on Greek-Israeli ties. 
 "I don't think there will be any long-term repercussions on Greek-Israeli relations; we regret the fact that certain facets of our co-operation, which were scheduled this coming week, were cancelled because of developments in Gaza, but we don't think it there will be any long-term effects on Greek-Israeli relations in the future," embassy spokesman William Anagnostaras told SETimes, adding that enhanced ties are beneficial for both countries. 
