23/10/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times from Belgrade - 11/10/06
On October 5th, Serbia celebrated a significant anniversary -- six years since the mass demonstrations in Belgrade which marked the end of Slobodan Milosevic's rule. On that day, the Democratic Opposition of Serbia (DOS) assembled several hundreds of thousands of people in front of the former Parliament building in Belgrade. Later there were confrontations with the police, citizens broke into the Parliament and national television, and the next day Slobodan Milosevic admitted his defeat in the elections of September 24th. The DOS presidential candidate, Vojislav Kostunica, took over the function of Yugoslav President. 
Six years later, citizens ask themselves "what has changed?" Although the public certainly expected more, and although a major setback took place with the murder of one of the most active reformers, Zoran Djindjic, much change has indeed taken place. There are no more queues for bread and milk, gas is not sold in plastic bottles in the street, people use credit cards, salaries in dinars have a value, pensions are paid more or less regularly, and the country has not been under sanctions for six years. 
The greatest economic improvements took place in the first three years after Milosevic's overthrow, observers say. "The present government has just continued to adopt, in a slightly diluted form, regulations prepared by the earlier government," says Energy Minister Kori Udovicki. As a result, "economic stability achieved in the earlier years has been kept". 
Nevertheless, Serbia still faces numerous problems. The road to the status of EU candidate has been blocked due to the government’s inability to deliver Hague indictee Ratko Mladic. The Kosovo problem is still an open question. Serbian citizens rarely travel abroad and now they need visas not only for all other European countries but also for some of the country's closest neighbours -- Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania. Most citizens are not satisfied with the speed of the economic transition and their living standards. 
All these problems will be inherited by whomever wins the upcoming elections, and most analysts agree they should have been solved much earlier. For instance, one of the DOS pre-election promises was adoption of a new constitution. It has taken six years for that to happen. 
"Citizens’ income grows by 4% to 5% percent annually," says Vladimir Goati, a scientific counselor at the Institute of Social Studies in Belgrade. "It is a nice growth rate for developed countries but it is currently not enough for Serbia. It is positive that the European standards are being applied, that we are a part of the international community and that we have improved our relations with neighbours. They are not extremely warm but they exist. It is good that there are no political murders too. However, a slow and inconsistent break with Milosevic's regime is the black hole of the democratic government," he says. 
Sociologist Zarko Trebjesanin thinks many citizens are dissatisfied because economic moguls close to the former regime have not been held accountable for the dubious, often ruthless ways they obtained their wealth. "Citizens feel let down because they realised that people who got rich due to their connections to Milosevic have not been punished. That is why they are disillusioned and depressed. Serbian citizens do not vote because they think it doesn’t matter who wins the elections," he says. 
In former Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic's view, the democratic forces in Serbia were able -- barely -- to agree on the need for Milosevic to go, but that's where it ended. "There was no consensus on other issues, either on the estimation of Milosevic's responsibility or on the future … We had the absolute consensus for one act and nothing more. And we did it," he says. 
On the other hand, Svilanovic argues, a kind of "negative consensus" exists about one issue: the politics behind the murder of Zoran Djindjic. "Those who fired the shots will be sacrificed and end up in prison. Nothing beyond that can be a subject of discussion and no one beyond that will take the responsibility," he says. 
President Boris Tadic marked the anniversary with a press conference. "The year 2007 has a full political significance for Serbia," he told reporters. "By resolving the status of Kosovo and completing the co-operation with The Hague tribunal, Serbia can become a country that is much closer to the EU -- which means more investments and the solution to the greatest issue -- poverty." 
October 5th was also an opportunity for Serbian citizens to remember the two citizens killed during the uprising, as well as the 65 injured. Momcilo Stakis died of heart failure, while Serbian Democratic Party (DSS) activist Jasmina Jovanovic was killed when she fell under a truck. "Six years ago she went from Pomoravlje to Belgrade with a wish to make Serbia a better state," said the Police Minister and DSS Deputy President Dragan Jocic, who laid flowers on her memorial on behalf of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica. 
 "She had a great wish to live in that Serbia. The accident prevented her from it. It is upon us to question every year what we have done and how we have contributed to the fulfillment of Menka’s dream," he said. 
