26/01/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 26/01/11 
Serbian youth increasingly consider the leading athletes, scientists and historical leaders as the people they most admire and want to emulate, a new survey has found. 
This preference represents a shift from previous years when young people listed mostly folk singers and people known for their involvement in the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s. 
An opinion poll conducted by the Fund for an Open Society Serbia in late 2010 confirmed that tennis players Novak Djokovic, Ana Ivanovic and Jelena Jankovic; football player Nemanja Vidic; and scientists Nikola Tesla and Albert Einstein top the role model list. 
Sociologist Ratko Bozovic says the change reflects the increased ability of young people to communicate with the world and acquire knowledge. 
"Young people in Serbia are fed up with trivial content," Bozovic told SETimes. "That is why the results of this poll represent a normal response of the youth in search for identity," he said. 
The poll's sample consisted of 1,500 people between 15 and 29 years of age. Only the bottom 10% chose singers of "newly composed" music like Ceca Raznjatovic and Seka Aleksic as well as Bosnian wartime leaders and war time indictees Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic. 
Serbian youth "refuse to search for a dirty river, rather they are looking for the pure sources", Bozovic said. 
Ministry of Science and Technology official Nada Mijatovic told SETimes that the poll results are very encouraging. 
"We have been working for a while on promoting the right values in Serbia and these results are very important," Mijatovic said. 
Advocacy efforts by the ministry include placing a large billboard featuring scientist Nikola Tesla at the Belgrade airport as well as organising yearly competitions for projects aimed at promoting science and research. Tesla's face is practically the first thing arriving passengers see in Belgrade. 
Some view the new generation of informed people as a pillar of the country's future development. 
"There is an entire army of smart and capable young people who certainly are not pessimists, they can't be, otherwise they would not be successful, and who believe in working and investing in oneself," Belgrade Institute for Excellence Sonja Liht said in an interview with local media. 
