03/05/2013
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/05/13 
Last month's heated UN General Assembly debate on the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia continues to raise further questions on whether the tribunal has contributed to regional reconciliation. 
"The role of the [Hague tribunal] was never to introduce peace and reconciliation but to punish those who committed war crimes. Reconciliation should be initiated among the local communities inspired by the country's leadership, which in the past 17 years has done exactly the opposite," Nedzad Horozovic, a member of the Sarajevo-based NGO Centre for Nonviolent Action, told SETimes. 
The issue received new attention following the April 10th session at the UN General Assembly scheduled by Assembly Chair and former Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic, after Serbia's frustration over the acquittals of Croatians and Kosovars, who were indicted for crimes against Serbs. 
Jeremic said he was not seeking to create a platform to attack the tribunal, but Serbian President Tomislav Nikolic, who presented Belgrade's position, said the court had only made reconciliation more difficult with verdicts practically accusing Serbia of the wars and crimes of the 1990s. 
"Someone is trying to solidify the notion that the Serbian side had bestially, orgiastically murdered and committed genocide, while the other side sat on its hands and did everyday and humanitarian work," Nikolic said. 
Sandra Orlovic, executive director of the Belgrade-based Humanitarian Law Fund, said Nikolic's presentation was "full of half-truths and propaganda" and that he "caused damage to the state." 
"It is clear to everyone that people with such a compromised wartime past, who speak about reconciliation by starting from the denial of crimes and care for the indictees and those who committed the most severe crimes, cannot talk about reconciliation," Orlovic said in an interview with Belgrade daily Danas. 
Savo Strbac, director of the Veritas Centre, which gathers data on crimes against Serbs, said The Hague tribunal had not contributed to reconciliation because it punished the accused Serbs, but not the crimes committed against Serbs. 
"No one was convicted of crimes against Serbs in the territory of Croatia and Kosovo," Strbac told SETimes. "Selective justice is the same as injustice." 
Milan Rodic, president of the Serb People's Party from Croatia, told SETimes that the court frequently prosecuted inductees by following political rules rather than law and justice. 
"Eighty percent of the convicted are Serbs. A little unbelievable, don’t you think? Therefore, this tribunal did not contribute in any case to the reconciliation of the Balkan peoples, but rather deepened the already deep gap between nations and religions," Rodic said. 
Vladimir Gredelj, a Zagreb lawyer and former president of the Association of Judges of Croatia, said one of the lessons of the tribunal's work is that the scope of such a court is important. 
"Reconciliation of the people depends on many factors, and justice is just one of them. I'm not sure that the [tribunal] had a lot of success in doing that," Gredelj told SETimes. "We've all seen the reaction of Croatia and Serbia, when Croatian generals were released. One side was celebrating, the other was furious. 
"Courts such as the [Hague tribunal] are generally reserved for small nations such as the Balkans. So I think it's of great importance that the international community make one major international criminal court, which would apply to all countries," Gredelj said. "It could be one of the solutions by which we could quickly come to justice, and thus to reconciliation." 
 Correspondents Anes Alic in Sarajevo and Drazen Remikovic in Zagreb contributed to this report.  
 What impact do you think The Hague tribunal has had on regional reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia? Share your comments below.  
