29/06/2009
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 29/06/09
Sunday's (June 28th) parliamentary elections were hailed by international observers and Albania's main political players as fair. That's a big deal, as the vote is considered a key step in Albania's EU accession process. 
According to the latest figures on the Central Election Commission's (CEC) website, with less than 40% of the votes counted, the opposition Socialist Party (SP) leads with 41%, followed by the ruling Democratic Party (DP)with 39.5%. 
However, exit polls show the DP ahead with 47.5% of the vote, followed by the SP with 39%. 
The CEC is expected to release preliminary official results later Monday. 
Two of the highest-profile candidates agreed voting went smoothly, despite some glitches. 
"Election Day has been entirely quiet; there have been little things, but there are no elections without small problems. It is important there were no major problems," said Prime Minister Sali Berisha of the DP, at a press conference after the polls closed. 
Separately, Edi Rama of the SP concurred. "Despite a series of irregularities and unpleasant details, in general the objective of guaranteeing the process, the quietness and democratic normality was realised." 
"There are some little irregularities, but less this time than in past elections," said OSCE Ambassador to Albania Robert Bosch. 
According to the CEC, turnout was about 46%. "I can describe this election process as the best ever for the country," CEC head Arben Ristani said. 
The highest turnout was reported in the southern town of Gjirokastra, according to Ristani. 
The practise of family voting -- family members voting on behalf of relatives -- was questioned by observers in Peshkopia and Fier. There were some technical problems, including missing ink -- which is used to stamp voters, so they cannot vote twice -- and names appearing more than once on voter lists in some centres. 
Around 5,500 police officers were deployed, and no incidents of violence have been reported. 
