11/04/2011
By Alina Lehtinen for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 11/04/11
Neriman Aysun, a Turkish woman in her 40s, spent ten years in a violent marriage. 
The violence escalated during the relationship's final three years, prompting her to escape with the help of the Mor Cati Women's Shelter Foundation. "I chose life over death," said Aysun, whose name has been changed for this report in order to preserve her anonymity. 
Hers is one of many similar stories in Turkey, and dozens end tragically every year. 
A government study, "Research on Domestic Violence against Women in Turkey", shows that almost half of Turkish women -- 48.5% -- experience some form of violence, but only rarely admit to being victims. 
"The Turkish government doesn't understand how to fight against violence against women. They don't want to understand it because this is a patriarchal society," said Gulsun Kanat, a volunteer social worker for Mor Cati. 
 Mor Cati, which means "purple roof" in English, operates mostly on a volunteer basis. The main office for the foundation is located in Istanbul. The office's walls are covered with posters with phrases such as "men's love kills three women per day". 
A poor track record on women's rights has been one of the factors keeping Turkey from EU accession. Behind even Iran and Egypt, Turkey ranked 126th among 135 countries in the World Economic Forum's 2010 Gender Gap Report. 
 "It is not surprising [that Turkey ranks so low on the list]. It is upsetting. We have been fighting against these issues for a long time and we have still so much work to do," said Kanat. 
Turkey has seen a drastic rise in the number of women murdered in recent years. While 66 women were reported murdered in 2002, the number has increased to about 1,000 in the last three years. 
Ayse Gunaysu, an executive committee member of the Human Rights Association of Turkey's Istanbul branch, says a combination of factors accounts for the increase. One is the ongoing war in the southeast between the military and the Kurdish armed movement, which has a direct impact on western Turkey as well. 
"[There is a] huge domestic migration, increasing unemployment in big cities and general prevalence of a culture of violence," she explained. An estimated half of the murders in Turkey are honour killings. In February 2010, honour killings again took the media spotlight after a 16-year-old girl was buried alive by her father for fraternizing with boys. 
Aysun says that many times crimes against women go unpunished or that authorities reduce the legally required punishments. 
 "When I went to the police to report my husband they told me 'this is life. Go back to your husband'," Aysun said. 
In 2004, the Turkish government abolished Article 462, which gave judges the discretion to reduce a murder sentence in honour killings. This article was often used together with Article 51, which states that if the murder is done because of "uncontrollable grief" or due to provocation, the sentence can be reduced by two-thirds. 
These two articles were often combined to reduce the sentences substantially. Privately-funded Mor Cati was among the foundations that helped change the Turkish Penalty Code to prevent shorter sentences for perpetrators of these crimes. 
Yet many judges are not adhering to the changes. 
On June 23rd 2010, a court in Diyarbakir dismissed charges against relatives planning to kill a female member of their family in an act described as an honour crime. 
The court ruled that planning an honour killing falls under "freedom of thought". 
 "There is no uniformity when it comes to court rulings. There are judges, although still few in number, who decide in favour of victimized women, which means laws can be implemented in different ways, depending on the mentality of the judges," said Gunaysu. 
"[The judges] don't want to follow the new changes. Men committing murders can easily get reduced sentences if the judge thinks conservatively," Kanat agrees. 
 Turkish legislation "recommends" that every municipality with a population over 50,000 open a women's shelter. However, there are currently only 65 shelters in the country of 77 million people. 
 "The law says that if the municipality does not have money for the shelter it doesn't need to open one," said Kanat. "The government should have a budget for the shelters and support the municipalities." 
"To improve this situation, the capacities of the civil society working in the field of women's rights should be enlarged and strengthened, and government authorities should be forced to take steps for protecting women under threat of violence," said Gunaysu. 
Many women's rights organisations claim that the current religiously conservative Justice and Development Party (AKP) has not fought hard enough against violence towards women. 
Turkey has struggled to provide rights to women. According to statistics from OECD, Turkey’s female labour force participation rate was only 26% in 2009. Currently only 50 of the 549 parliament members are women. 
 At the same time, however, rapid urbanization is starting to redefine gender roles. About a century ago, 75% of the population still lived in rural areas. Now more than 70% of people live in cities. 
Along with the trend comes a shift in social norms, which in some cases can led to tension between the younger and older generations, experts say. 
Such pressure can, in extreme situations, lead to outbursts of violence such as beatings and murder. 
Many women in Turkey are still raised in accordance with traditional gender roles that regard the man as the head of the house. Aysun's ex-husband forbade her to watch television because he did not want her to be exposed to examples of gender equality. 
However, having escaped, Mor Cati has helped Aysun understand her legal rights. 
She said that one of her main hopes for the future would be that obtaining a restraining order would become easier. 
 "More women are getting murdered by their husbands in Turkey," she said. 
Today Aysun works as a cleaning lady. She says life is still not easy for a single mother of two in an expensive city like Istanbul. 
"But compared to before, this is paradise," she said. 
