17/12/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb –17/12/07
Croatian President Stipe Mesic on Saturday (December 15th) handed over the mandate to form the new government to conservative Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) leader Ivo Sanader. Sanader, who has been the country's prime minister for the past four years, received the authorization three weeks after the country's general elections. 
 According to the Croatian constitution, to get a mandate or form the government, a party or a coalition needs to get support from at least 77 deputies of the 153-seat assembly. Sanader's HDZ won 66 seats at the November 25th vote -- 11 seats short of a parliamentary majority. 
However, the party has reportedly secured the missing seats -- and a second term as prime minister -- by winning over the Farmers' Party and the Liberal Party (HSS/HSLS), along with several minority representatives and the sole representative of the Pensioners' Party. 
 In exchange, HDZ had to sign a pre-coalition agreement, ensuring that the all the parties' demands would be met. Sanader now has 30 days to form the government. If he fails, the opposition Social Democratic Party (SDP) leader Zoran Milanovic will get his chance. 
"I have given the mandate to form the government to Ivo Sanader because he has given me guarantees and convinced me that he has the support of more than 77 deputies in the Croatian Parliament," Mesic said Saturday, after he spoke with all the political leaders whose parties won parliamentary seats. 
Sanader has said he will form a cabinet that will meet with the parliament's approval very soon. He said that the elections results show that Croatian citizens voted for continuity. 
 Speaking on national television immediately after getting the mandate, Sanader had harsh words for his opponent, Milanovic. The latter did not congratulate HDZ for getting the mandate, but instead focused on his own attempts to form the government. 
"Mr. Milanovic either does not respect the will of Croatian voters or [missed] November 25th," Sanader said. 
Although Sanader will probably be the next prime minister, he will have a much tougher political situation to handle than in his first term. With his administration now dependent on coalition partners, the coming four years will test not only his leadership skills but his ability to compromise. 
