02/08/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia – 02/08/05
The National Movement for Simeon II (NMS-II), the second-place finisher in the June elections, began consultations Monday (1 August) on forming a new government, following the Bulgarian Socialist Party's (BSP) failure to win support for its proposed cabinet. Discussions are under way with representatives of the BSP, the Bulgarian People's Union (BPU) and Democrats for Strong Bulgaria (DSB). 
 It is the latest attempt to resolve a political crisis triggered by the inconclusive parliamentary elections and to finalise a new government, which will be tasked largely with steering the country towards its planned EU entry in 2007. Bulgaria faces the possibility of that entry date being postponed by a year, should the EU decide not all conditions have been met. Officials in Brussels have made clear that the long post-election wrangling is not helping the situation. 
 "Every day counts in the preparation and the reforms needed for this accession," European Commission spokesman Amadeu Tardio said, following last Thursday's parliamentary rejection of a BSP-proposed cabinet. 
With 31 per cent of the vote, the BSP was the first-place finisher in the 25 June election, which saw the results split among an unprecedented number of parliamentary parties. Following weeks of political bargaining, including with the NMS-II, the party proposed a coalition cabinet with the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), the third largest parliamentary force. 
The BSP-led Coalition for Bulgaria has 82 seats in the 240-member parliament, while the mainly ethnic Turkish MRF has 34, bringing the proposed government's total number of lawmakers to 116. 
After a heated debate last Wednesday, lawmakers voted 120-119 to elect BSP leader Sergei Stanishev as prime minister. But in a second vote in the early hours on Thursday, the proposed cabinet was rejected. 
"In the present situation... our mandate is over," Stanishev said after that vote. A new mandate will now be given to the party formed and led by incumbent Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg. Disagreement over who should get the top job -- Saxe-Coburg or Stanishev -- has been a major sticking point in negotiations between the BSP and NMS-II. 
According to NMS-II deputy leader Plamen Panayotov, however, his party is open to the possibility of Stanishev as prime minister, provided a special coalition council -- including leaders of all coalition partners -- is formed to decide on strategic issues. 
On Monday, officials from the BPU confirmed they are ready to back an NMS-II cabinet, even if it includes the BSP. But Vesilin Metodiev, deputy chairman of the DSB, said his party would not be a part of any government involving the Socialists, the political heirs to the former Communist Party. The NMS-II holds 53 sets in parliament, so that if it were to form a coalition cabinet with the BSP alone, it would already have a simple, 135-seat majority. 
However, Stanishev and the BSP have signaled that they may prefer an alternate outcome: early elections. Should NMS-II fail to form a cabinet within the seven-day term provided by law, President Georgi Parvanov can ask any of the other six political forces in parliament to try. If none are successful, the country will head towards a new vote -- something that polls show most Bulgarians oppose. Such a scenario could easily scuttle the country's chances of joining the EU in January 2007. 
 Following the BSP's failure to form a cabinet, the European Commission voiced hope that "a strong and stable government" would be in place as soon as possible to continue preparations for EU membership, including the adoption of crucial reform measures. 
