08/03/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 08/03/05
Last month, the IMF mission completed a regular review of its three-year financial arrangement with Serbia-Montenegro. Agreement was not reached, however, on several key issues, and talks are continuing. 
The mission must issue a positive assessment of Serbia's economic policy before the IMF Board of Directors can approve a new credit line worth $190m. 
In an official statement, Fund analysts pointed to widening macroeconomic imbalances, which they said are jeopardising the country's earlier achievements. In particular, the mission said, domestic demand is outpacing GDP, spilling over into Serbia-Montenegro's large external accounts deficit, and fuelling inflation. 
Steps taken so far by the government are unlikely to be sufficient, the analysts warned, noting that the imbalances are largely due to slow privatisation and structural problems in state and socially-owned enterprises. 
"With the large structural current account deficit leaving little scope for increasing the low share of investments in GDP, sustained economic growth will require redeploying labour and existing capital to more productive usages," according to the mission's statement. "State- and socially-owned enterprises are unlikely to offer the competitive products required for export-led growth, which is the only realistic way of achieving sustained increases in real incomes and employment." 
"The government has drafted a plan for accelerating privatisation, and the Fund supports this," explains IMF Belgrade office chief Harold Hichhofer. "But wise and cautious control of demand and wage policy is required. The majority of salaries in the public sector must not increase more than 7 per cent, except when accompanied by a reduction in the number of employees." 
According to Miroslav Miskovic, the president of Delta Holding, the privatisation process so far is unfolding amid considerable chaos. Unless greater transparency is established, he says, "Capital of unknown origin will be incoming, while our competition in the region is buying companies in Serbia, making investments. This is positive, but when we attempt to do the same in those countries, we come up against significant barriers." 
Economist Miroslav Prokopijevic, meanwhile, says that economic policymakers in Serbia should concentrate this year on two things -- increasing transferred inflation and the exchange rate of the dinar. 
Economic growth cannot be based on foreign donations, meagre proceeds from privatisation and cheap credit, Prokopijevic says, warning that inadequate economic policies will become more costly in the future. This year, he notes, state debt repayments could help push inflation up well beyond the projected 9.1 per cent, possibly reaching as much as 21 per cent. 
