03/02/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/02/10
Serbian authorities have announced that domestic violence is on the rise, exacerbated by a lingering economic crisis and persistent alcoholism. 
"In 2008, there were 7,666 victims of domestic violence, 32% more than in 2007," said Labour and Social Policy Minister Rasim Ljajic. "In 70% of the cases, the victims are women and female children. In half of the cases, the problem is linked with alcoholism in the family." 
The number of adults charged with domestic violence and tried in court has increased fourfold since 2004. 
Local NGOs say that one in four Serbian women are victim to verbal or physical violence. Authorities believe the number is far bigger than official data because domestic violence often goes unreported. 
 "A growing number of women decide and are being encouraged to report domestic violence," said Ljajic. "[But] violence against children is still not visible enough, and those cases are frequently reported by neighbours or relatives, rarely by parents." 
During a recent visit to a safe house for women and children, Ljajic said the state must take a stand against domestic violence. To root it out, he said, strict legal regulations -- as well as a profound change in the social environment -- are needed. Also, the courts and police must process cases more efficiently. 
Safe houses were also launched in Serbia by the Centre Against Domestic Violence, a local NGO. Centre co-ordinator Vesna Stanojevic told Southeast European Times there are currently nine safe houses in the country: two in Belgrade and seven elsewhere. 
The centre received nearly 5,000 calls reporting domestic violence in 2009. A victim can stay approximately three months, longer if they are in imminent danger. Ensuring the safety of women and children once they leave the safe house, however, is far more difficult. 
"The abuser often remains at large, either because of shortcomings in the legal procedure [against him] or because the wife is afraid to report him," said Stanojevic. "In those circumstances, women cannot easily leave the safe house with their children and go on with their lives." 
 A three-year project called "Fight against sexual and gender violence" was launched through the ministry of labour and social policy. The project is sponsored by the Norwegian government, in co-operation with the UN Development Programme (UNDP) office in Serbia. 
Natalija Micunovic, who is part of the project, says no one should expect the initiative to end domestic violence, as the problem can only be reduced. Stanojevic believes that economic dependence on abusers guarantees that the problem will persist. She appealed to the government to provide jobs for women who are victims of domestic violence to better ensure their security and that of their children. 
