07/11/2005
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 07/11/05
As Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) prepares to mark the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement, politicians and international diplomats are pondering modifications to the country's constitution. The changes under discussion aim to boost the strength of state-level political institutions, but do not include any fundamental alterations of the country's territorial organisation. 
The current division of BiH into two entities -- the Bosniak-Croat Federation and Republika Srpska (RS) -- is not up for reconsideration. "We find changes of the basic Dayton solutions unacceptable. Everyone should declare if they accept Republika Srpska as a part of BiH," says RS President Dragan Cavic. 
 Meanwhile, Croat proposals to further subdivide the country appear to be going nowhere. Ivo Miro Jovic, the Croatian member of the BiH presidency, thinks that if RS is allowed to continue, then Croatians should also get their own entity. The Catholic Church has weighed in, proposing that instead of two entities, BiH should have four regions. These ideas have not been welcomed by representatives of the international community, who view them as a step backwards. 
With territorial reorganisation off the agenda, talks among the leading political parties in BiH have centred on reforming the tripartitie presidency, strengthening the position of state-level prime minister, and strengthening the state-level parliament. Some parties -- including the Bosniak SDA and Social Democrat Party -- advocate replacing the current three-person presidency with a single president. 
RS politicians are less keen on the idea. According to Milorad Dodik, president of the main RS opposition party, the Union of Independent Social Democrats, the best solution would be for one of the presidency's members to receive an extended mandate. 
Meanwhile, the governing RS parties, the Serbian Democratic Party and Party of Democratic Progress, want the collective chief of state to have protocol jurisdiction only. All important decisions, they argue, should be brought before the Council of Ministers of BiH. 
Politicians from all three ethnic constituencies agree that there should be more parliament members. The most common suggestion is for the House of Representatives to have 150 members instead of 42. 
For several months, BiH politicians have been debating the possible changes in talks held under the auspices of former Deputy High Representative Donald Hays, a present associate of the Peace Institute. The international community has emphasised that there can be no imposed solution. Rather, the way forward must be reached through a consensus among domestic political factors. 
BiH political leaders are expected to sign a statement outlining the basis for constitutional change when they meet in Washington for the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Accords. After that, according to the international community's top envoy, High Representative Paddy Ashdown, an agreement will be finalised -- possibly by March 2006. That would allow voters to elect a completely new legislature and executive branch in October balloting. 
