29/08/2005
(Various sources -- 24/08/05 - 28/08/05)
Serbia's Social Democratic Party (SDP) announced on Sunday (28 August) its departure from the six-party government coalition. It called on party members in government positions to either step down from their posts or leave the SDP. 
The party's decision follows a government move on Thursday to dismiss SDP leader Nebojsa Covic from his posts as head of the co-ordination centres for Kosovo and for the Presevo, Bujanovac and Medvedja region. The cabinet also recommended the removal of another leading party member, Slobodan Orlic, who heads the Serbia-Montenegrin government's information department. 
The sackings were in response to the SDP's refusal to back IMF-required legislation paving the way for the restructuring of the state-run Oil Industry of Serbia (NIS). The law, a step towards the company's privatisation, was ultimately passed without the support of the two SDP representatives in the 250-seat Serbian Parliament. 
"The decision of the Social Democratic Party to no longer support the government's programme is completely legitimate," Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said in a statement. "Since in a democratic order, one cannot at the same time hold office and be the opposition, I invite all Serbian government SDP representatives, pursuant to their oppositional activities, to immediately resign." 
However, it is not clear that SDP government members are prepared to accept their party's decision. Labour Minister Slobodan Lalovic and his deputy, Vlatko Sekulovic, quickly dissociated themselves from the SDP and sided with the Kostunica administration. Subsequently, seven other SDP government officials condemned their party for refusing to support the NIS privatisation, describing it as a key pre-requisite for the Paris Club's write off of $700m in Serbian foreign debt, as well as for further co-operation with the IMF. 
"The implementation of the agreement with the IMF and the launching of negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU, scheduled for 5 October, are the most important goals that must be achieved in the course of this year," a Serbian government statement quoted them as saying. 
Following the meeting of the SDP chief council on Sunday, the party said that those who continue to support the government should leave its ranks. It also decided to start drawing up a plan of action as an opposition party. 
Meanwhile, Kostunica has suggested that Sanda Raskovic-Ivic of his Democratic Party of Serbia replace Covic as head of the Kosovo co-ordination centre and that Serbia-Montenegro's Human Rights Minister, Rasim Ljajic, head the co-ordination centre for Presevo, Bujanovac and Medvedja. 
