24/03/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/03/09 
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader visited Belgrade on Friday (March 20th), marking a new page in relations between Serbia and Croatia. Good relations between the two countries are widely viewed as key to Southeast Europe's overall stability and prosperity. 
However, bilateral relations were at their lowest point following Croatia's recognition of Kosovo last March; Serbia still considers Kosovo its territory. Ties deteriorated even further when the International Court of Justice declared last November it was competent to hear Croatia's lawsuit against Serbia for genocide in the 1991-1995 conflict. When Serbia filed a countersuit, relations went on a downward spiral. 
In Belgrade, Sanader met with Serbian counterpart Mirko Cvetkovic and with President Boris Tadic. After the meetings, the two prime ministers said they had not overcome existing disputes but rather had agreed to keep them from hindering their countries' future co-operation. "There are big differences" on certain political issues, Cvetkovic said, but Serbia and Croatia agree to "turn to the future". 
Tadic said Serbia and Croatia share common values. "We want to join the EU, and we have a vision for a prosperous and stable Balkans," he said. 
But Belgrade and Zagreb face a common problem as well, namely, the blocking of their EU accession processes. To unblock them, Belgrade must first wrap up its co-operation with The Hague tribunal, while Croatia must resolve its ongoing territorial dispute with EU member Slovenia. 
Sanader promised Croatian aid for Belgrade's EU bid as well as for its association with NATO. Croatia is just a step away from full membership in NATO. 
"When Croatia becomes a NATO member, and the country is also very close to joining the EU, we will give full support to our neighbours," said Sanader. 
The two prime ministers also discussed the possibility of allowing displaced Serbs to return to Croatia following the 1990s armed conflict there, as well as of resolving the fate of people who went missing during the conflict. 
Belgrade and Zagreb concur that they need to co-operate in order to solve their urgent problems, particularly the effects of the global economic crisis. "I am not very interested in yesterday … I am interested in what I can do for Croatian citizens and for improving relations with Serbia and other neighbours today," Sanader said. 
Accompanying the two prime ministers were Serbian and Croatian businesspeople, who discussed specific opportunities to construct gas storage facilities and an oil pipeline, as well as overall joint co-operation in the energy field. The Serbian businesspeople complained that their capital and products still confront non-economic barriers to entry in the Croatian market. 
