04/04/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 04/04/05 
Allegations have surfaced charging that former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic embezzled around 36m convertible marks (over 18m euros) from the former National Bank of Republika Srpska (RS), money which may have helped finance his subsequent years on the run. Karadzic is one of the UN war crimes tribunal's three most-wanted indictees, and bringing him to justice is considered a prerequisite for further progress by BiH along the road to EU and NATO membership. 
Last week, the Bosnia and Herzegovina daily Dnevni Avaz published a statement by the main opposition leader in RS, Milorad Dodik, who said Karadzic walked off with the money in the spring in 1997 and that documentation exists which proves this. 
Speaking to Montenegrin media, Karadzic's brother, Luka, rejected the allegations, characterising them as "absurd". But a report in the Monday (4 April) edition of the Banja Luka daily Nevasine Novine has also raised the issue of fraud, citing a statement last November by former RS Justice Minister Momcilo Mandic. According to Mandic, Karadzic manipulated the RS entity budget in order to secure himself financially, making it possible for him to go into hiding afterwards. 
 Authorities in BiH have stepped up efforts to nab Karadzic and other war crimes indictees, hoping to avoid the possibility of being rejected again for entry into NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme. A commercial developed for broadcast on the three most-watched Bosnian Serb television outlets shows images of Karadzic, General Ratko Mladic and others, while a voiceover declares "either they go to The Hague or we go to hell." Meanwhile, billboards are being put up throughout RS, displaying the names of wanted indictees along with a phone number for tips. 
NATO has already twice rejected BIH's application to join the PfP, which is considered a first step towards full membership in the Alliance. A third rejection could spell the end of BiH's chances to enter the programme. 
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, meanwhile, has hinted that both Karadzic and Mladic could end up in The Hague within the very near future. He told journalists in March that more transfers of indictees are coming, and nodded when asked whether that list includes the two top fugitives. 
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte has said Belgrade knows the exact whereabouts of Mladic and could arrest him within hours if it wanted to. 
"It's just a question of political will," del Ponte told the Reuters news agency in an interview last month. 
