18/05/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 18/05/06
A new agreement signed by the Albanian government and the provisional authorities in Kosovo aims to boost co-operation in the area of tourism. Albania is already a favoured holiday destination for visitors from Kosovo, while the neighbouring province -- currently in the process of resolving its final status -- hopes to build its own tourism industry over the coming years. 
Tourism "is very important for the overall economic development of Kosovo, and I think Kosovo has great potential in this field," said UNMIK representative Joachim Ruecker at the signing ceremony. "I am thinking especially of the ski resort in Brezovica and I am very much looking forward to seeing the outcome of this agreement," he added. 
The document was signed by Kosovo Trade and Industry Minister Bujar Dugolli and Albanian Tourism, Culture, Youth and Sports Minister Bujar Leskaj. It calls for facilitating visits to Kosovo by citizens of Albania, and to Albania by Kosovars -- especially during the peak season, from 25 May to 15 September. 
Under the deal, the respective tourism institutions of Albania and Kosovo will work together to exchange experiences and information, as well as jointly participate in international tourism fairs. Steps will also be taken to promote eco-tourism and multiethnicity. 
We will exchange experiences in the tourism field and will work together to create the best conditions for the communication among the citizens of Kosovo and Albania. We will also organise different activities to boost tourism. With this agreement we institutionalise the co-operation and exchange of information in the field of economy," Dugolli said. 
Tourists from Kosovo represent a "good market," Leskaj said. He added that Albania has much to offer, including the seaside attractions of Velipoja, Shen Gjini, Saranda and Ksamili. Over the past seven years, Albanian authorities have eased border control procedures in order to facilitate tourism from Kosovo. 
Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha's government is making a major push to enhance tourism, pledging that the upcoming season will be the best ever. "We have to do our utmost," Berisha told his cabinet earlier this year, calling for improvements to the tourism infrastructure and the removal of deterrents such as power cuts, littered beaches and erratic water supplies. 
