08/01/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 08/01/10
Serbian President Boris Tadic spent Orthodox Christmas on Thursday (January 7th) at the Decani monastery in Kosovo, saying that residents needed "reconciliation between peoples". 
"As the Serbian president, I am sending a message of peace in Decani to everyone everywhere on behalf of the Serbian citizens, on behalf of the state of Serbia and on my own behalf, believing that peace is needed more than anything in this common region we live in. It is particularly needed by all the people sharing a common fate in this Balkan, very difficult and complex region," Tadic said. 
Kosovo authorities announced that they had allowed Tadic to visit Kosovo not as a state official, but as a man who wanted to visit the monastery on Christmas. Pristina claims there was an agreement that Tadic would not make political statements during his visit, which he allegedly violated. 
However, his office said Tadic had made no agreements with the Kosovo government, rather, he notified EU authorities. 
Pristina representatives berated Tadic for answering a journalist's question by indirectly saying that Kosovo is part of Serbia. 
Tadic's controversial statement was that he would not want to see "only Serbia, meaning Kosovo as well, in the EU, but all countries of the South-East European region integrating into the EU as soon as possible". 
Xhavit Beqiri, spokesperson for Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, said that with such statements Tadic "is narrowing the paths of co-operation and movement". "As much as he tried to show restraint this time, Tadic could not avoid saying that Kosovo is allegedly part of Serbia, even though he knows full well he was in a different country, the Republic of Kosovo, which is an independent and sovereign state," Beqiri told Belgrade-based news agency Beta. 
The opposition criticised Kosovo institutions for allowing Tadic to visit. 
Alliance for the Future of Kosovo official Ardian Gjini said he couldn't expect a head of state to avoid making a political statement. "Serbia's president … may not only make a religious visit to Kosovo. It is a political buffoonery of Kosovo's institutions." 
Pristina political analyst Belul Beqaj echoed that sentiment. "The fact that the Serbian president came to Kosovo primarily carries political meaning. The fact that the occasion of his visit is the religious aspect is marginal compared to his political visit." 
The EU has not released an official comment. 
KFOR units provided heavy security during Tadic's visit. He flew by helicopter to the monastery, then used armored vehicles on the ground. Protestors demonstrated against his visit, but KFOR soldiers maintained order. 
 Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi in Pristina contributed to this report. 
