12/03/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 12/03/09
Mila Jankovic, a 17-year-old girl, recently reunited with her biological father, Muhamed Becirovic. Mila was separated from her family during the Bosnian conflict more than 16 years ago, when she was one year old. Becirovic is a Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) national currently working in Germany. 
 "This is the first time that a missing person from the 1992-95 BiH conflict has been found alive," said Safet Sahmanovic, a BiH Red Cross representative. 
The happy ending, so unusual for the conflict, came about in May 2008, following Mila's two-year search for her biological parents. With the assistance of social workers in Belgrade and Sekovici, a village in Republika Srpska, as well as the BiH Red Cross, Mila was able to meet Becirovic. DNA tests that he initiated conclusively proved his paternity. The rest of the Becirovic family, however, is still missing. 
Mila recently found out that her original given name was Senida. She would like to legally change her name back to Senida Becirovic but also wishes to retain the name Mila out of respect for her foster parents. At present, her main concern is to arrange a meeting between her foster parents and her biological father. 
"They all wish to meet, but I am worried how the meeting will go," she told Dnevni Avaz. Mila is currently staying with relatives in Caparde, her native village near Kalesija in eastern BiH. 
An unknown Serb soldier rescued her in 1992 from a burned-down house in Caparde. The soldier brought the baby to an orphanage in Vlasenica, controlled at the time by Serbian military forces. The Jankovics, a Serb couple, adopted and raised her. 
She spent 14 years with the Jankovics in Belgrade's Cukarica district under the name of Mila Jankovic. The girl credits her Serbian foster parents for taking good care of her and telling her the truth about her origins. Two years ago, she was forced to leave the Jankovic home and join a children's village in Novi Sad when she began to search for her biological parents. 
According to a local agency, there are 17,000 missing persons in BiH. Most of their families have given up hope of ever finding them. 
