14/07/2008
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 14/07/08
Former Interior Minister Ljube Boskovski, indicted by The Hague for alleged command responsibility for war crimes, won acquittal on all counts on July 10th. However co-defendant Johan Tarculovski, a low-ranking police officer, was sentenced to 12 years in prison for murdering three people in the village of Ljuboten during the 2001 conflict in Macedonia. 
Following his release, Boskovski enjoyed a hero's welcome in Macedonia. The delegation greeting him at the Skopje airport included Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, a number of high-level officials, followers of the ruling VMRO-DPMNE party and members of the former Lavovi (Lions) Police Unit. 
After spending three and a half years in prison, Boskovski kissed the ground and received communion. 
He told supporters, "I salute you, not only ethnic Macedonians but my brethren Albanians, Roma, Turks, Bosniaks, and Serbs, everybody who is ready to live and die for Macedonia. At this moment, we should forgive each other instead of spreading hatred." 
The government expressed pleasure with Boskovski's acquittal and was hopeful that Tarculovski would have a chance to present facts in his own case. Tarculovski's lawyer announced he would appeal his client's sentence. 
The Democratic Union for Integration (DUI), a party emerging from the former Albanian National Liberation Army (NLA) -- a participant in the 2001 conflict -- and now part of the government formed by Gruevski, did not officially respond to Boskovski's acquittal. 
In line with their shared principle of offering no comment on court rulings, the EU and NATO, guarantors of the Ohrid Agreement, said nothing. 
 According to the prosecutors, during the raid on Ljuboten, police brutally beat Albanian villagers with rifle butts or pieces of burning wood. The tribunal held Tarculovski responsible for three of seven reported murders. 
 "Tarculovski personally led the operation and was with the police as it moved through the village," Judge Kevin Parker said. 
 Tarculovski had been a relatively junior officer and was acting under orders, but Parker ruled, "This does not excuse your conduct." 
The court cleared Boskovski of culpability. Prosecutors tried to convince the tribunal that Boskovski was responsible for failing to punish the guilty officers. 
"It has not been established that Ljube Boskovski failed to take the necessary and reasonable measures to punish the police," ruled Parker. 
