24/06/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Ohrid -- 24/06/13
Rotary clubs in the region are working to encourage reconciliation between countries and improve future relations in the Balkans through the expansion of communities and strengthening of mutual friendships. 
The clubs say that through co-operative actions, they are trying to change the lives of the many people facing economic and social problems. 
Rotary is an international public service organisation that operates in 200 nations and has more than 1.25 million members. Thousands of Balkan citizens are members of the more than 100 local Rotary clubs in the region. 
The organisation held a conference in Ohrid, Macedonia, from June 14th to 16th to discuss the future of the Balkans and emphasise peace, friendship, economic growth, co-operation to care for youth and full integration of all Balkan countries in the EU. 
Orchelik Balkan, a Turkish businessman and former director of the board of Rotary International, said one of the organisation's upcoming efforts in the region will be a peace initiative. 
The organisation has offered similar programmes in crisis areas elsewhere in the world, holding educational activities based on a theme of regional peace. Rotary also sends students to study peace at universities. 
"Much can be done for the region through the Rotary. The goal is to connect people and communities because they have many false perceptions about each other. We need to build bridges of friendship, to facilitate communication between communities. We want to build joint humanitarian projects that would include local and state authorities that would help everyone," Balkan said. 
There is significant co-operation between Rotary organisations in the Balkans, leading to many common humanitarian projects, Vlado Grgic, member of the Rotary club in Bar, Montenegro, told SETimes. He added that co-operation between Rotary clubs in Montenegro and Italy helped provide equipment for a medical laboratory in Podgorica. 
"With these joint actions we want to show that we can change some things the politicians did in the past, led by some ideas that were not good. For children with special needs in Podgorica, we have provided [specially equipped] living rooms. We have organised joint action with Serbian Rotary clubs for disabled children and orphans in Belgrade. In co-operation with clubs in England … we share Christmas gifts, and this is one of the best regional actions so far," Grgic said. 
Grgic said Rotary clubs in the Balkans are working on a joint project that aims to provide scholarships to prestigious universities around the world for students who come from poor families from all Balkan countries. 
"This project will include young people from Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania, Bosnia. We will provide scholarships for talented children from poor families. We will collect enough money to educate and bring them on the right way," Grgic said. 
Co-operation and joint initiatives between Rotary clubs can help in bringing together the people of the Balkans, Vlado Apostolov, president of the Rotary club in Ohrid, told SETimes. 
Clubs from Ohrid and from the Bulgarian city of Pirdov together built a monument in memory of 15 Bulgarian tourists who died three years ago in a boat accident on Lake Ohrid. 
"This accident brought together these two clubs and that co-operation resulted in the construction of a memorial park in honour of the dead tourists. We are working on joint projects with the Rotary clubs from Turkey and Serbia and the plan is to continue with this in the future," Apostolov said. 
Activities between clubs in Macedonia, Serbia and Turkey have focused on cultural, artistic and educational exchanges, as well as humanitarian activities. 
"What we have done is a positive example in recent history between Macedonia and Bulgaria, and shows how relations between the two neighbouring nations should take place," Simon Simov, the first president of the Rotary club in Pirdov, told SETimes. 
Similar collaboration will take place between clubs in Macedonia and the one in Leskovac, Serbia. Dragana Magyarov Savich, president of the Leskovac Rotary Club, told SETimes that there are plans to work on projects related to children with special needs and special talents, saying that children "are the future of our region." 
"We have awarded the best children in the schools with computers, and in Leskovac we organise a Rotary camp in a place where we gather the best students from all cities in Serbia. We want to help, and that is why we are promoting the idea of co-operation and progress in the region. We can greatly help the government to work for the good of citizens," Savich said. 
Have you participated in any Rotary club activities in your community? Share your experiences in the comments section. 
