23/06/2011
By Aaron Stein for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 23/06/11 
Like much of the rest of the world, Turkey and Iran were caught unprepared by the Arab Spring. Now, as the two nations seek to formulate their response, their own bilateral relations could be undermined by differing long-term strategies. 
Both Turkey and Iran are regional powers seeking to increase influence in the Middle East. By and large, relations are friendly, and the two countries have a mutual interest in maintaining close ties. Both have an interest in maintaining stability in Syria, but are at odds over Syria's direction as its people push for democracy and reform. 
Whereas Turkey is prodding Syria to implement reforms and has condemned the crackdown on protestors, Iran has sought to bolster the Assad regime and, reportedly, provided aid to security forces. 
Ankara and Tehran also have differing long-term regional objectives that could eventually threaten the viability of the relationship. 
 "The problem is that that they both aspire for Middle Eastern leadership," making it likely that their "objectives will come into conflict with each other", Elliot Hentov, an expert on Turkish-Iranian relations, told SETimes, adding that the two powers are "partially competing for the same market in the Middle East". 
Over the long haul, Ankara wishes to see a politically stable and economically integrated Middle East, with Turkey serving as one of its hubs. In contrast, Iran's primary goal is to expand its influence in order to reduce its international isolation. 
 Iran has adopted a divide and conquer strategy that exploits conflict to achieve its objectives. This approach clashes with Turkey's efforts to reconcile regional conflicts, according to Hentov. 
The Islamic Republic's entrenchment in Lebanese and Iraqi politics demonstrates its ability to take advantage of fractures and political infighting, whereas Turkey's goal of acting as a trusted moderator in seemingly intractable conflicts -- such as Lebanon, Palestine, and Iraq -- reveals Iran and Turkey are competing for different ends. 
 In the past, "Iran's appeal stemmed from is ability to establish itself as a brand of resistance against the West, and by extension the autocratic and Western allied Arab rulers," according to Hentov. 
However, the Arab Spring has undercut Iran's appeal by introducing an Arab initiated discourse "that revolves that around liberty and democracy", something Turkey is keen to promote. 
Moreover, the Syrian uprising has come on the heels of Iran's own brutal suppression of protestors following the 2009 presidential elections and the failure of its economic model. These two factors have dulled the appeal of the Islamic Republic. 
 In contrast, the meteoric rise of the AK Party and Turkey's economic success have galvanised Arab public opinion, as evidenced by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's popularity throughout the Middle East. 
At the outset, Turkey is better prepared to deal with the Arab Spring because what its represents is more in line with the Arab masses. However, it still faces a credibility problem because its foreign policy strategy relied upon partnering with the Arab autocrats whose actions belie the tenets of Ankara's foreign policy objectives. 
 Before the Arab Spring, Turkey's policy seemed quite deft because "the kings and dictators were remarkably subtle and clever in hanging on to power," William Hale, SOAS Emeritus Professor, told SETimes. 
Now that their grip has weakened, however, Turkey appears caught in a contradiction between its foreign policy ideals and its actions. 
 "They [Ankara] have been pursuing a dual track of realpolitik, cutting deals with the Syrian regime, while at the same time wrapping itself in the rhetoric of universal justice. There is a disconnect," according to Hentov, adding that Turkey will eventually be forced to choose between these competing interests. 
Any choice is sure to raise the ire of the Iranians. "As of now, Tehran's interests are so intertwined with the Syrians, anything negative Turkey does will upset the Iranians," said Hentov. 
The Assad regime in Syria provides Iran with a critical connection to the Arab world. Its proxies and influence in Lebanon allow Tehran to remain a relevant player in the Arab-Israeli conflict. If the link is severed, Iran risks losing the sources of its own legitimacy. 
Time is not working in Turkey's favour, Hentov warns, adding that a long drawn out conflict in Syria will expose the rifts in the Turkish-Iranian partnership, which "will ultimately be negative". 
 If relations sour, Turkey risks losing a valuable partner in its fight against the PKK. 
 According to Hale, "Turkey needs to co-operate with Iran because of the Kurdish question." 
"No one knows how the situation will turn out," Hale said. But the unfolding events in Syria suggest Ankara faces a range of alternatives from "very bad to least bad" for its regional outlook, he added. 
