16/03/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana –16/03/11
A Tirana court decided on Monday (March 14th) to detain 13 persons who were arrested at the weekend for their alleged involvement in an illegal oil smuggling scheme. 
The suspects are accused of allowing two companies to pass off a low-octane oil byproduct as high quality imported diesel, during the period from 2007 to 2009. Businessmen, customs officers and tax officials are among the accused. Two large companies, Euroil and Fisheku, have been implicated. They have been operating on the market for years. 
 Still unclear is how much damage has been done, ranging from the fraud itself to the impact on vehicles and the environment. If the charges prove true, however, it could turn out to be the largest contraband fraud in Albania's history. 
The prosecutor's office told local media that the alleged illegal activities began in 2007, and continued till 2009. Oil businessmen Hajri Elezaj and Ilias Fisheku, and Fisheku's son, Martin Fisheku, are the main suspects. 
 The Albanian daily Mapo reported on March 12th that over the past two years, high amounts of virgin naphtha, as the byproduct is called, were sold on the market as processed oil. 
 "This activity came from the private company Euroil with the shareholder and administrator Hajri Elezaj, in co-operation with another private company Fisheku, with shareholder and administrator Ilias Fisheku," Mapo quoted the Albanian prosecutor's office as saying. 
Customs officials are thought to have aided the scam by forging documents. The profits from the fraud amounted to millions of euros. 
Dritan Prifti, a former minister of economy, trade and energy, alleged last year that such activities had been going on. He now says the investigation has proven him right. 
Three ministers, or at least former ministers, are involved, along with senior state police officials, and customs and taxation officials, he claimed. 
But Prifti himself is the subject of a separate corruption probe involving allegations that he took a 70,000-euro bribe. He says he did nothing wrong. 
The administration of Prime Minister Sali Berisha says it is cracking down on graft and fraud. "The government will continue an uninterrupted fight against all smuggling and anybody that tries to damage the [Albanian] economy," Deputy Minister of Finance Alfred Rushaj said. 
Rushaj pointed fingers at the opposition, saying that when the Socialists were in charge, virgin oil was freely traded for eight years on the domestic market without taxation. 
"The gangs that take hold of oil send it to the Berisha yard," opposition head Edi Rama said Sunday. 
 "Meanwhile, those who enabled this robbery and started the smuggling sit at the government table." 
According to Transparency International's representative in Albania, Lutfi Dervishi, the scheme confirms that some institutions in the country are not functioning properly. The fraud, Dervishi said, should have been exposed by fuel quality inspectors, the tax office, customs or the police. 
