04/10/2005
(Various sources -- 03/10/05 - 04/10/05)
Turkey stepped firmly on the road to EU membership shortly after midnight on Monday (3 October), when its accession negotiations with the Union were formally launched with a session of the bilateral intergovernmental conference in Luxembourg. 
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, who arrived for the ceremony only after the EU foreign ministers approved the framework for the talks with Ankara, said it was a "win-win" situation for both Europe and his country. The start of the negotiations with Brussels, he said, marked the start of a "new era" for Turkey. 
"Our relations with Europe began in 1963, a period of more than 40 years," Gul said. "We have arrived today at a historic stage. It is not just Turkey that will win, but also the EU will win." 
British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, who chaired the more than 30 hours of tense negotiations preceding the approval of the negotiating framework, hailed a "truly historic day" for Europe and the international community. 
"I'm in absolutely no doubt that these benefits will follow from this enlargement and it will bring a strong secular state which happens to have a Muslim majority in to the EU," Straw said at a press conference with EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. "Proof that we can live, work and prosper together and we are all much stronger for being united than for being divided." 
With Turkey's entry talks expected to last at least a decade, Straw warned that "a long road" lay ahead. 
The EU Council of Ministers approved Turkey's negotiating framework after Austria, which was pushing for amendments to define the ultimate goal of the talks as a sort of a special partnership rather than full membership, eventually withdrew its objections. 
"The shared objective of the negotiations is accession," the document finalised Monday reads. It calls on Ankara to continue the process of reform and democratisation, and stipulates the bloc's right to suspend the talks in the event of "a serious and persistent breach". 
In another major development, the EU officially opened accession negotiations with Croatia in the early hours of Tuesday following a positive assessment by chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte of Zagreb's relations with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
Croatia's EU entry talks were originally scheduled to begin in March, but were put on hold due to its failure to deliver a key war crimes fugitive to The Hague court. Retired General Ante Gotovina is sought by the ICTY for his alleged role in the killings of 150 Krajina Serbs and the expulsion of thousands of others during the 1991-1995 ethnic conflict in Croatia. 
"For a few weeks now, Croatia has been co-operating fully with us and is doing everything it can to locate and arrest Ante Gotovina," del Ponte told the foreign ministers of the 25 EU member states Monday. "This is a great day for Croatia," Prime Minister Ivo Sanader told reporters, pledging that his country would continue making strong efforts to track down the fugitive. 
Croatia is hoping to join the EU in 2009. If the process of the accession negotiations runs smoothly, that would be a "sensible" time frame, Rehn was quoted as saying. 
