12/12/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 12/12/11
International Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) chief prosecutor Serge Brammertz submitted a report to the UN Security Council last week on the state of co-operation with The Hague tribunal, but to the Serbian public, co-operation seems like a long closed chapter. 
Brammertz's report reminded all concerned that the tribunal's work is not finished, and has yet to find out who helped the last fugitives, Radovan Karadzic, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic hide for over a decade. 
"We want to see results in the investigation about how they had avoided arrest for years. When I visited Belgrade in November, I saw little was being done on the matter and I want better results for my next report," Brammertz said. 
Serbia's War Crimes Prosecution Office spokesperson Bruno Vekaric told SETimes the investigation into who aided the fugitives is still in progress. Because the investigation is a "live process", he declined to provide any details. 
"We, too, want to learn who was pulling wool over our eyes for years on end and helping The Hague tribunal indictees evade justice. It is in our interest to find out as soon as possible for our own sake, rather than because of international pressure," he said. 
Vekaric said that beginning in mid-January, the Criminal Procedure Code would be implemented, greatly facilitating the investigative process. 
"This will also affect the investigation into the network of aides who helped the fugitives," Vekaric added. 
Political analyst Dejan Vuk Stankovic argues that The Hague tribunal has become a less important issue after the arrest of Karadzic and Mladic, and the investigation into the network of aides is not being given enough attention for political reasons. 
"That is a very unpleasant topic for Serbian officials and judiciary representatives because the network of aides to the fugitives is hiding in the state apparatus and various sections of society," Stankovic told SETimes. 
"The [international community] pressure is lacking in this case, making the entire matter ad acta," Stankovic added. 
Apart from the criticism over unfinished work, Brammertz praised Serbia in the report. Extraditing the last indictees may be an "indicator of a better future for international law", he stressed, as it turned out that no one could evade justice. 
Serbia's Ambassador to the UN Feodor Starcevic underscored in the Security Council that the country has fully co-operated with the tribunal. 
That, he said, gave Serbia the moral right to insist on an investigation of all crimes related to human organs trading carried out by the Kosovo Liberation Army. 
Starcevic added that Serbia expects the probe to determine the full truth and bring the perpetrators to justice. 
Regarding continuing co-operation with the tribunal, Stracevic said Serbia would provide access to archives, documents and witnesses. "We receive demands for assistance in those matters daily and we review them immediately, without delay," he said. 
In the report, Brammertz also addressed Croatia, blasting the country's officials for statements criticizing the work of the tribunal and its verdicts. 
Moreover, he criticized BiH for the escape of former Hague tribunal indictee Radovan Stankovic from the Focha jail after he had been handed over by the tribunal to BiH's judicial authorities. 
"He escaped four years ago, and I see no activities by the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities aimed at solving that case," Brammertz said. He explained that to arrest Stankovic, co-operation of other states in the region is necessary. 
