02/03/2006
By Blerta Foniqi in Pristina and Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade for Southeast European Times -- 02/03/06
The UN's special envoy for the Kosovo status talks, Martti Ahtisaari, says he does not expect the current political shuffles in Pristina to affect the negotiations. 
"I expect that we will continue with the process and I don't think that it will have any negative effect on our process," Ahtisaari said in Pristina Wednesday, hours after the news that Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi is stepping down and Parliament Speaker Nexhat Daci is being replaced. 
Ahtisaari, who is on a three-day visit to the province, declined to comment on these developments. "It's up to the government and political leadership to decide how they organise themselves. And that's none of my responsibility," he said. 
He arrived in Pristina after visiting Belgrade, where he held talks with Serbian President Boris Tadic, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and other officials. 
"I pleaded with [Serbian] leaders to encourage the Kosovo Serbs to take an active role in the negotiations and in Kosovo institutions. I told them that the talks in Vienna were a good start and invited them to stay continuously engaged," Ahtisaari said. He confirmed that direct talks would resume in Vienna on 17 March, and said the discussions would focus on local financing, co-operation and relations between municipalities, and on the future organisation of the status talks. 
Cultural and religious heritage, minority rights and the economy will be the next major topics on the agenda after decentralisation, Ahtisaari indicated. He also said he would dispatch technical teams to Belgrade and Pristina next week to pave the way for continuing negotiations on practical questions. 
Greater progress in meeting UN standards is needed in some areas before the status question can be addressed, while in other areas problem-solving mechanisms are needed, Ahtisaari said. He added that finding solutions to Kosovo's problems would take much longer than the actual negotiations. 
On Friday, Ahtisaari will travel to New York to report to the UN on the current situation. After that, he will return to Vienna. 
After his arrival in Pristina on Wednesday, he received the Kosovo leadership's answers to a questionnaire sent by Ahtisaari on 10 February. The document covers a range of issues, including minority rights. 
He held meetings Wednesday with Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu and the head of UNMIK, Soren Jessen Petersen. On Thursday he was scheduled to meet the Kosovo Serb leadership as well as representatives of other communities. Also on his agenda is a meeting with representatives of the Association of Kosovo Municipalities to discuss the topic of decentralisation. 
