24/05/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/05/05
Speaking at the 5th Summit of Serbia-Montenegro earlier this month, Serbian President Boris Tadic said the country is in the midst of major social reforms that will help it move swiftly down the road to European integration. At the same time, he called for more foreign investment, saying this would be crucial for Serbia's political stability. 
The two-day event, held in Belgrade from 9 May to 10 May, focused on the state union's path to EU accession and its prospects for economic development. It was attended by representatives of the federal government and the two constituent republics, as well as diplomats and members of the business community. 
Tadic told summit participants that Serbia's co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal -- a key requirement for progress towards EU membership -- has improved, but must continue to be considered complete. He also said the issue of Kosovo must be resolved in a peaceful and democratic manner that will lead to the stabilisation of Serbia-Montenegro and the entire region. 
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica pointed to new investments -- which totaled 465m euros in the first trimester of this year -- as a sign of Serbia's economic recovery. Urging investors to consider Serbia, he said great potential exists in the development of the communication infrastructure linking Serbia with Europe and the Middle East. 
"Chances for investors also lie in Serbia-Montenegro's Free Trade Agreements with Russia and Southeast European countries, which enable free access to a market of 210 million consumers," Kostunica said. 
The total political, economic and legislative framework for foreign investment in Serbia is getting better and safer, thanks to the government's policy focused on stabilisation and forming institutions, Kostunica said. Finding a solution for Kosovo will contribute to lasting stability in the country and the region, he added. 
Serbia could become a member of the EU by 2012, according to Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus. But before that, he said, Serbia must adopt a new constitution in order to create institutions that will implement the reforms necessary for EU integration. "Serbia needs a new development strategy, which includes growth and feasible development," Labus said, adding that he expects 1.4 billion euros in foreign investment by the end of 2005. 
Among the challenges facing Serbia-Montenegro on its journey to the EU is the matter of relations between the two republics. US Ambassador to Belgrade Michael Polt, who also attended the summit, stressed the need for a common Serbia-Montenegro economic space, regardless of any possible political agreement on the future of the union. 
Polt said that the United States will assist Serbia-Montenegro in resolving those issues, as well as others which it considers vital -- such as economic reforms, strengthening institutions, the rule of law and fighting crime and corruption. The United States is the single largest investor in Serbia, with $1 billion invested to date. 
Montenegrin Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic said that Montenegro's offer to Serbia to form a union of independent states will be open until the end of the year. If Serbia turns it down, he said, a referendum on Montenegro's status will be held in a fair and democratic manner by the end of April 2006. "It is our obligation to enable Montenegrin citizens to have their say on Montenegro's status," Djukanovic told summit participants. 
