28/06/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 28/06/10 
Analysts believe that a number of positive events targeting co-operation among the Balkan states have been initiated by the crisis within the EU. Balkan leaders want to show that the region is not a zone of instability. By focusing on improving mutual co-operation, they hope to accelerate the admission of the whole region to the EU. 
The culmination, after a number of regional meetings, was the EU-Western Balkans ministerial summit in Sarajevo earlier this month. Although no concrete plan for the Balkans' association with the EU was made, regional leaders received a promise that they will join Europe once they meet all the necessary conditions. 
The summit was preceded by a meeting of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Serbian, Croatian and Montenegrin leaders, also in Sarajevo, and the Istanbul summit of the Turkish and Serbian presidents and the head of the BiH presidency. 
 Croatian President Ivo Josipovic paid an important visit to the BiH Serb entity Republika Srpska, and the series of positive events wrapped up with the signing of an agreement on military co-operation between Serbia and Croatia on June 8th. 
Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences Professor Predrag Simic told SETimes that the meetings were not only intended to present the region as stable. 
 "At times of global crises, relations in the Balkans always improve and co-operation intensifies between the countries of the region. It now seems to me that the stage is open for much more intense Balkan relations, because the big forces are predominantly preoccupied with their own problems. New players will also come onto the scene, primarily Turkey," said Simic, a former ambassador to France. 
 Banja Luka political analyst Tanja Topic agrees. "Regional co-operation is a very important segment of the entire European integration process," which is why Croatia and Serbia in particular want to "initiate and boost regional co-operation". 
 "Some new figures have also appeared on the political scene, ready to carry a different policy than before. I am referring to Josipovic. I believe he is true to his policy of reconciliation and regional co-operation," Topic told SETimes. 
 Both Simic and Topic say that Belgrade's refusal to recognise Koovo as an independent state may still be a problem, as 22 of the 27 EU members have recognised Kosovo. 
 "These days Belgrade is full of people demanding answers to questions concerning Kosovo. That is why Serbia is facing a great dilemma. Its position is that, if the choice 'Kosovo or the EU' is offered, Kosovo will be the priority. I think that stand is facing a great test at the moment," Simic added. 
Topic agrees that resolving the Kosovo issue will be the most difficult task in the Balkans. She, however, adds that Belgrade, apart from the official policy, is likely negotiating its European future with Brussels, in private. 
"I think that Serbia is going down a parallel road to the EU. Belgrade, at least in public, remains faithful to its policy of refusing to recognise Kosovo. Many other processes are running simultaneously away from public eyes. That is the other dimension of Serbia's policy," she says. 
