15/07/2005
(Blic - 15/07/05; AP, DPA, Radio B92 - 14/07/05)
Serbian President Boris Tadic urged key war crimes fugitive Ratko Mladic to surrender Thursday (14 July) to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Should the former Bosnian Serb military commander fail to do so, Serbian authorities "should finish the job" by arresting and extraditing him to The Hague court, Tadic added. 
Mladic has been indicted by the ICTY on multiple charges of crimes against humanity and violations of the laws or customs of war for his alleged involvement in war crimes committed during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He also faces two counts of genocide for, among other things, his alleged role in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre. Mladic, originally indicted in 1995 along with former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, disappeared after the war ended. He is widely believed to be hiding in Serbia. 
The government of Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has pledged in recent months that it will arrest and extradite to The Hague all those wanted by the ICTY, found on Serbian soil and refusing to surrender. Full co-operation with the ICTY is a key condition Serbia-Montenegro and the other former Yugoslav republics involved in the Balkan conflicts in the 1990's must meet to build closer ties with the EU and NATO. 
Addressing a meeting of his Democratic Party on Thursday, Tadic said his country must meet its international obligations, stressing that as long as Mladic remains at large, Serbia-Montenegro will not move forward on its path to Europe. 
Those indicted by the ICTY must not be lionised, he added, urging the public to come to terms with the war crimes committed in the name of the Serbian people. The country must focus on the reforms it must implement to ensure a better future for the next generations, Tadic said. 
 His remarks coincided with Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot's visit to Belgrade on Thursday. Bot also urged Serbia to meet its obligations towards the ICTY, so that it can make progress on its EU bid. 
"Mladic's handover to The Hague is an essential condition," Bot said after talks with Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic. "It is a signal that the authorities ... subscribe to the values and norms which the EU was founded on." If they fail to bring indictees to justice, it would signal that the "desired level of political stability" is missing, Germany's Deutsche Presse-Agentur quoted Bot as saying. 
In April, the EU gave the green light for opening talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia-Montenegro. The process is expected to begin this autumn. 
"This is a moral issue of top priority for Europe and for us, everything regarding our future depends on this," said Draskovic. He agreed with Bot that Mladic's extradition to The Hague is crucial for Serbia-Montenegro's Euro-Atlantic integration prospects. 
