06/08/2007
(AP, Euronews, RTE, Bloomberg, BBC, Javno, Dnevnik.bg - 06/08/07; Irish Times, CBC, Javno, HRT - 05/08/07) 
A sigh of relief came from Croatian firefighters Monday (August 6th) morning, as they managed to contain a major forest fire that had been raging near the Adriatic coastal resort city of Dubrovnik since Saturday. 
Fanned by strong winds, the fire spread Sunday, creating a 20km-long front at one point. As it approached the resort city's suburbs, local authorities declared a state of emergency and prepared to evacuate people from the affected areas. For the first time since the end of the 1991-1995 war in Croatia, sirens sounded to warn people of imminent danger. "
We have set up a civil security headquarters and we're ready for evacuation of inhabitants from the districts that are in danger," Dubrovnik Mayor Dubravka Suica said. 
While urging women, children and the elderly in the affected areas to move to a shelter, she also assured tourists the situation posed no risks for them. Most of the hotels in the ancient city are situated near the coastline. 
Known as the "pearl of the Adriatic'' and listed by UNESCO as a world heritage site, Dubrovnik is a key tourist destination, visited by hundreds of thousands of people each summer. Scores of tourists were stranded at the city's airport as the fire raged close by. 
"The fire was so close to the airport that we could see the flames and smell the smoke," Sunday's Irish Times newspaper quoted an Irish tourist, who had to spend the night at the Cilipi airport, as saying. "We could also see the fires from the air as we were coming down to land and the landing was rough enough because of the draught generated by the fires." 
With some of the roads in the area closed to traffic, drivers had to spend the night in their cars. Dubrovnik was experiencing power shortages on Sunday. 
As the situation worsened, Suica asked all able men to join the hundreds of professional firefighters struggling to put out the blaze as it threatened to engulf houses. 
The strong winds initially prohibited the use of water-bombing planes. Concern over unexploded landmines lying in the hills since the conflict in the 1990s further hampered firefighters' efforts. 
As the winds eased, the overnight battle helped tame the flames, allowing the head of Dubrovnik's regional protection and rescue office, Goran Violic, to say on Monday morning that the situation was under control. But he also cautioned that it would be several more days before the fire is completely extinguished. 
 One firefighter was reportedly injured. 
Forest fires that ravaged southern Europe last month, fed by dry conditions that turned woods into tinder, were some of the worst on record, the European Commission (EC) said on Thursday. 
More than 3,300sq km of land already has been burned in southern Europe this year --nearly as much as in the whole 2006, the EC said. 
