25/06/2010
By Panayiotis Koumantaros and HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Polokwane and Athens -- 25/06/10
Greece put on a respectable show against Argentina, given that Diego Maradona's squad is among the favourites to win the 2010 World Cup. 
But the team finally couldn't counter the damage from its 0-2 defeat by the Republic of Korea during the first group match -- a loss that made qualification for the second round a Herculean task, despite a subsequent win against Nigeria. 
The loss to Argentina marked the end of an era, as coach Otto Rehhagel announced his long-expected departure from the team, which he has coached for the past nine years. 
His legacy includes a Euro championship in 2004, qualification for the UEFA tournament in 2008, qualification for the World Cup in South Africa and, of course, the meteoric rise of the Greek team on FIFA's international standings. 
Rehhagel chose not to fly back to Athens with the team so he could attend some of the second round matches. Only time will tell if his departure was a mutual decision, or if "King Otto", as the local press often calls him, is bitter. 
Noted Portuguese coach Fernando Santos is considered a likely candidate to succeed the 72-year-old Rehhagel. Santos, 55, has coached three of Greece's most popular teams -- AEK Athens, Panathinaikos Athens and PAOK Thessaloniki -- after sitting on the bench of Portugal's "Big 3": Porto, Sporting and Benfica. 
If predictions prove true, he is expected to implement a "youth movement" in a team whose most notable players are in their early to mid 30s. 
Beyond the pitch, security problems that have plagued the World Cup in South Africa were plainly evident inside and outside the Peter Mokaba Stadium in the uplands city of Polokwane. 
Groups of Greek fans were reportedly harassed on the way to the stadium, and the situation inside the venue was disorderly. One of the World Cup's major sponsors -- a multinational beer brand -- was selling its product inside. 
In terms of the actual play, Maradona's "pre-emptive" statements about possible rough play against his team's stars proved groundless, as nary an Argentine player suffered even the slightest injury. Conversely, three top Greek players were substituted due to injuries suffered during the game. 
Before defender Martin Demichelis' rebound shot into the Greek net in the 76th minute, the "miraculous" Messi was mostly kept at bay by young Genoa FC fullback Sokratis Papastathopoulos, whose solid performances at the 2010 World Cup may prove to be the ticket to an even bigger club. 
The Greek press contingent stayed at the same hotel as the Argentine players and staff. It proved to be a magnet for Argentine and local fans alike, many armed with the vuvuzela trumpets that have droned throughout the World Cup, and with drums and accordions, turning Polokwane into a small Buenos Aires. 
Nevertheless, security was extremely tight, with no fans or the press able to gain access to players at the hotel. 
