26/06/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 26/06/06
The idea of making connections and having somebody putting in a good word for you is certainly not a novelty anywhere in the world. In small economies such as Montenegro's, however, the phenomenon is more evident than in larger ones. 
Dragana, a recent economics major graduate from Podgorica, says she is having difficulties finding a job since she does not have friends in high places. Knowledge and expertise mean little without connections, she adds. 
Similarly, law school graduate Zoran has an outstanding grade point average, has passed the bar and state exam, and completed his apprenticeship in a law firm, but remains unable to find a job in his field of expertise. He has applied for several jobs, but keeps getting turned down. 
There are many similar stories among university graduates in Montenegro. Those who gave up on finding a perfect fit or were discouraged by unfair competition are already abroad trying their luck. Others fall into several groups. Some are struggling to prove themselves by working for a low wage in their field, hoping that the new political situation -- Montenegro's sovereignty -- will influence the job market. 
Another group includes those who are not able to go abroad but have given up on opportunities at home, choosing instead to switch to some other profession. The most fortunate are those who find a way to marry their expertise with the right position and salary; they are most likely working for a foreign organisation. 
Others opt to prolong their studies and live on their parents' budget for as long as possible in order to avoid the situation altogether. 
According to data from Montenegro's Statistical Office (MONSTAT) data, in 2004 Montenegro had 630,548 inhabitants, out of which 259,092 were active, 187,333 employed (the rate of employment being 37.4 per cent), 71,759 unemployed (a 27.7 per cent unemployment rate) and 242, 266 inactive. The rest were under the age of 15. 
Aside from the need for connections or an inside edge, a major factor contributing to the high unemployment rate is the lack of information about job opportunities. Exacerbating it further is the inefficient functioning of human resources departments at many firms. 
Recently, there have been attempts to revive the job market for the young and educated. For example, earlier this year the economics department at the University of Podgorica -- in collaboration with the international student association AISEC and with support from the Montenegro Employment Agency -- organised the first career fair ever to be held in Montenegro. Entitled Career Ways, it gathered 27 companies, including the Telekom Group, Opportunity Bank, Gorenje, the Customs Administration, the Central Bank of Montenegro, Hipotekarna Banka, Procter and Gamble, and Deloitte. 
With the catchy slogan "Come, See, Get a Job", the fair drew many young professionals, recent graduates as well as those still engaged in their graduate or postgraduate studies. It aimed to match them with companies seeking to fill their human resource needs, giving participating companies a chance to establish a database of potential employees. 
The most visited booth was that of the Telekom Group, which says it needs people with skills in marketing, finance and sales. Montenegro Stars Group, meanwhile, plans to employ about 700 people at the Hotel Splendid in Becici, which is to be opened on 13 July. The personnel needed range from waiters to managers of sales and marketing; preference is being given to those who speak English and perhaps German and Russian. 
Deloitte is looking for about 10 people with a high grade point average and a background in economics who are ready for extensive travel, know English and have excellent computer skills, especially in Excel. Procter and Gamble is looking for people of all educational backgrounds with good English and computer skills. 
The Employment Agency of Montenegro is also striving to contribute to the betterment of the job market. During Career Ways, the agency presented its latest project, entitled A Chance for Youth. It offers employment opportunities to trainees with high school diplomas and college/university degrees. For those who have no previous experience, the Employment Agency will subsidise 80 per cent of the gross pay. 
Developing human capital is one of the goals of EU assistance to Montenegro. As part of efforts to support public administration reform, the European Agency for Reconstruction -- which manages a cumulative portfolio of some 121m euros -- assisted the Employment Agency of Montenegro in implementing legislation meant to establish a professional career system for the public service. 
 Events such as Career Ways have the potential to help stem the brain drain of young people from Montenegro and help decrease unemployment which is continuing to be a major constraint to economic development. But some disillusioned job seekers remain unconvinced. As Milica, an English major, put it, although employers at the fair held open the promise of job opportunities, in many cases the firms already have people ready to fill positions advertised as "open to the public". 
All too often, having the right set of skills, a distinguished academic record and references from professors still counts for little if you are missing one other crucial element -- the inside edge. Until that changes, young people will continue to view going abroad as the only real solution. 
