26/09/2005
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 26/09/05
"Enlargement fatigue" in the EU has been a topic of discussion for some time, even before the proposed constitutional treaty went down in a stunning defeat in France and The Netherlands. Some argue that the last wave of expansion, with ten new members joining overnight, has already stretched the bloc almost as far as it can currently go -- the malaise in some of the bloc's older members, they argue, signals a need for consolidation. But while a malaise undoubtedly exists, it could be argued that the fundamental problems have little to do with enlargement, and to speak of enlargement fatigue is to misrepresent the basic issue. 
There are deep currents of change in the world economy, driven by technological advances and the economic rise of Asia. These currents have major implications in areas that resist transformation. Some European heavyweights show signs of institutional sclerosis. They are unable or unwilling to make needed adjustments even as the global economy signals again and again the urgent need to do so. Thus, feelings of despondency, political impotence and a growing inclination to blame outsiders arise. 
Despite the widespread concern that "something is rotten in Denmark" -- in other words, that a need exists for major structural reforms, as set out by the updated Lisbon Agenda -- things are not equally bleak across the Union. In fact, the record is multicoloured. Some of the northern countries boast good economic and social performance, providing policy inspiration for others, while some southern countries are faring considerably worse. Most of the new member countries (NMCs) have shown remarkable economic growth rates in the last few years, an average of over 5 per cent yearly, more than doubling the average in the old 15 member countries. The Institute for Comparative Economic Studies of Vienna has projected some degree of economic slowdown in several NMCs for this year, but the growth differential between East and West remains large. There is substantial potential for catching up in the years to come. 
 In terms of economic growth rates, the Union can be portrayed by two axes: one that separates the better performing north from the underperforming south; and another dividing the stagnating west and the vigorous east. The latter split has implications for Southeast Europe. The Union will eventually include the countries located in part of the continent, and it pays to consider what their forerunners have witnessed on their way to and after accession. 
Joining the EU has proved an extraordinary anchor for change, for institutional and structural reform. It has rallied wide popular support for measures which, otherwise, might have been very hard to implement. In this respect, we must not underestimate the importance of keeping hopes alive during times of economic and social duress affecting more than a few citizens. Moreover, hope must be sustained after accession as well, when citizens may become increasingly disgruntled if growth rates, as translated into personal incomes, are low. And herein lies a major difference in the collective psychologies of Eastern Europe compared to parts of the West. Economic vigour fuels hope in countries aiming for major improvements, while stagnation breeds frustration. 
The growth differential between east and west is especially significant because post-communist economies are still plagued by institutional fragility. As economic theory stipulates, what matters for long-term growth is the quality of the institutional set-up. On this hinge capital formation, technological progress, and the building up of human capital on an adequate scale. Arguably, the efficiency reserves in transition economies and their capacity to restructure and absorb new technologies, in spite of inherent institutional fragility, has defied more sceptical views. This is observation, it goes without saying, is applicable to Southeast European economies, which benefit from relatively well-qualified labour and low wages, and whose proximity to western economies favours substantial industrial relocation. 
Two inferences can be drawn. Firstly, economic growth rates of above 5 per cent annually can be sustained in the region, aiding the process of catching up. Such rates would help deal with massive unemployment and its nefarious economic and social effects. But for such rates to consolidate, there is a need for intense absorption of new technologies, for innovation on a broad scale. Such innovation is badly needed so that these economies will not become over-dependent on low value-added manufacturing and services. 
Related to growth and its prospects is policy consistency. In spite of vacillations and setbacks, accession countries have achieved remarkable progress in their institutional set-ups and the restructuring of their economies. Arguably, they evince more flexibility in certain respects than some of their western counterparts. And I am not referring here to labour markets only. Low inflation is now ubiquitous, budget consolidation has been advancing steadily (though the "budgetary shock" of accession is quite significant, for it demands several percentages of GDP for the EU budget fee and co-financing of EU funds), and market regulations have been improving markedly. It is an open secret that policy consistency is critical for sustainable growth. 
Also important are business-friendly fiscal policies which stimulate investment and job creation. The development of small- and medium-sized firms relies on a congenial fiscal environment as well. There is increasing fiscal competition in the EU, and no country's policies can afford to be insensitive to it. For the NMCs, the current candidates for accession, and Balkan countries looking for eventual membership, the artistry in fiscal policy lies in reconciling the need to be more business-friendly with the needs of raising the resources of public budgets. Higher budget revenues are called for in order to cope with functioning inside the EU. 
A further factor is one that is too often overlooked in economic discussions. Recent years have demonstrated the impact of climate change, with huge floods and dramatic fluctuations of temperature producing havoc in several central and eastern European countries in recent years, jolting public budgets. I submit that such occurrences are likely to be repeated, and clairvoyant policymakers have to make adequate room for contingencies when they allocate state revenues. This is a challenge for the years to come, in the sense of not allowing budget deficits to get out of control. Regional co-operation must also be increased, since natural disasters do not acknowledge borders. Solidarity is a sign of policy wisdom and statesmanship. 
 Last, but not least, the SEE countries need to wage a more effective fight against corruption, criminality and the hijacking of the state by vested interests. For sustained growth to benefit most of the population, as well as for a strengthened rule of law and a surer democratic transformation, this demarche is a must. 
