18/05/2009
(The Moscow Times - 18/05/09; AP, FT, WSJ, Euronews, Deutsche Welle, B92, ANA-MPA - 16/05/09; Reuters, AFP, Bloomberg, BBC, Xinhua, Itar-Tass, Dnevnik.bg - 15/05/09)
Russian gas giant Gazprom signed agreements with the main energy companies of four partner countries Friday (May 15th) in a bid to speed up the implementation of the South Stream gas pipeline project. 
Construction of the pipeline, designed to carry Russian natural gas to Europe while bypassing Ukraine, will end in 2015 at the latest and would cost 8.6 billion euros, Gazprom CEO Alexei Miller said. 
"The deadline for commissioning the South Stream gas pipeline was set in today's signing of corporate agreements," he said after signing the pacts with the Bulgarian, Greek, Italian and Serbian companies in Sochi. 
According to plans, the 900km South Stream pipeline is to run under the Black Sea and then split into two branches -- a northern one going through Serbia and Hungary to end in Austria and a southern one through Greece to Italy. 
"Most of this gas will substitute [for] gas currently crossing Ukraine, and [there will be] some new gas," Eni CEO Paolo Scaroni said after the signing ceremony, attended also by Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and his Italian counterpart, Silvio Berlusconi. 
The increase means Italy will get enough supplies to cover more than 80% of its total gas consumption, the British daily Financial Times reported. 
Several disputes over the past few years have caused serious disruptions in Russian gas deliveries to Europe, which gets a quarter of its gas from Gazprom. The most recent, during freezing temperatures in January, raised further questions about Moscow's reliability as an energy partner and prompted louder calls for a diversification of the EU's supply routes and sources. 
According to Scaroni, South Stream would improve the security of Europe's gas imports. 
The capacity boost for South Stream "means one billion cubic metres more here will be one billion cubic metres less gas crossing Ukraine", he argued. 
Aside from the deal with Eni, Miller also signed separate agreements with the heads of Bulgarian, Greece and Serbian energy firms. Those pacts envision the creation of joint ventures in the three transit countries to conduct feasibility studies on the construction of pipeline sections that will run through their territory. 
According to Putin, Friday's agreements represented the countries' "common contribution to European energy security". 
Analysts, though, contend the new push to advance the South Stream project was a Russian power play and an intended blow against the rival EU-supported Nabucco pipeline, which will, if completed, carry Caspian natural gas to Europe. 
"Russia ... want[s] to kill off Nabucco or substantially delay it," the AP quoted Chris Weafer, chief strategist at UralSib investment bank in Moscow, as saying. 
