24/08/2006
(Sofia Echo - 24/08/06; AP, AFP, BNN, BNR, Sofia News Agency, Sofia Echo, Makfax, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Government of Bulgaria - 23/08/06; AP, Sofia News Agency, Reporter.gr - 22/08/06)
Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev presented a report Wednesday (23 August), outlining the country's political and financial stability as the cabinet's key achievements over the past 12 months. 
The Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), which won the inconclusive June 2005 parliamentary elections, formed a three-way coalition government with the centrist National Movement for Simeon II and the ethnic Turks' Movement for Rights and Freedoms on 16 August last year. As BSP leader, Stanishev headed the government, pledging to make every effort to make the country ready to join the EU on 1 January 2007, as scheduled. 
On 26 September, the European Commission (EC) is due to publish its final report on Bulgaria's preparedness for EU entry and determine whether the country should be admitted on time. If the EC concludes that Bulgaria has failed to meet its commitments, including in the area of fighting organised crime and corruption, it could suggest that membership be delayed by one year. 
Vowing further measures in the fight against organised crime and corruption, Stanishev voiced confidence Wednesday that Bulgaria would join the 25-nation bloc in January, giving his country an opportunity to boost its economy, infrastructure, public relations and public administration. 
Bulgaria is set to receive 11 billion euros in EU funding over the first seven years of its membership, but it might not be able to absorb those resources unless it implements "efficient and transparent" procedures, the AFP quoted the prime minister as saying. 
The 101-page report on the government's first year in office -- copies of which were distributed to journalists -- outlined increased foreign investments and economic growth as some of the positive developments over the past 12 months. 
Bulgaria has attracted a record 1.4 billion euros in foreign direct investment in the first five months of 2006, up from 810m euros for the same period last year. If current trends continue, foreign direct investments for the whole of 2006 could reach 2.3 billion euros, Stanishev told reporters. Economic growth for the first six months of this year was an estimated 5.6 per cent. An expected 3 per cent budget surplus is expected to help the country cope with potential risks the economy could face. 
"There exist certain risks for the economy, the most serious of them being the current account deficit ... which means that our economy is not competitive enough," the AP quoted Stanishev as telling reporters Wednesday. 
Bulgarian Finance Minister Plamen Oresharski said on Tuesday that he expects the current account deficit to reach between 14 per cent and 15 per cent of GDP at the end of this year and the annual inflation rate to reach 6.6 per cent, up from initial budget projections of 5.8 per cent. 
Stanishev was confident, however, that the country would be able to "keep inflation in check" and reduce inflationary pressures in the next two years. 
Despite the economy's stable performance in recent years, incomes remain low, the prime minister said, admitting that the country will be the poorest of the EU member nations. He sought to dispel overly optimistic expectations that things will improve dramatically once Bulgaria enters the bloc. 
"We should not create the illusion that we will wake up on 1 January 2007 in a country with renovated roads and European salaries," he said. 
