12/01/2006
(Reuters, AP, AFP - 11/01/06)
An Argentine judge ordered on Wednesday (11 January) the extradition of a Bosnian Serb war crimes suspect to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
Milan Lukic was arrested in Buenos Aires in August, more than five years after the UN war crimes tribunal unsealed its initial indictment against him, his cousin Sredoje Lukic and a third suspect, Mitar Vasiljevic. 
Lukic, according to the ICTY, led a paramilitary group known as "White Eagles" or "Avengers", blamed for the killings of at least 100 Bosnian Muslims in the Visegrad municipality and surrounding areas between April 1992 and October 1994. The group is said to have worked with local police and Serb military units in directing a reign of terror against the local Muslim population. 
Under an amended indictment of July 2001, Lukic, 39, faces 12 counts of crimes against humanity and nine counts of violations of the laws or customs of war for his alleged involvement in atrocities, including murder, torture, persecution, looting and destruction of property. 
The UN prosecutors allege that, acting in concert with others, he committed, planned, instigated, ordered, and otherwise aided and abetted the planning, preparation, and execution of "the extermination of a significant number of Bosnian Muslim civilians, including women, children and the elderly". They also hold him responsible for the persecution of Bosnian Muslim civilians on political, racial and religious grounds, throughout the municipality of Visegrad and elsewhere in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
According to the indictment, in early June 1992, Lukic, Vasiljevic and others led seven Bosnian Muslim men to the Drina River and forced them to line up along its bank before shooting them dead. In a similar case several days later, Lukic and another individual allegedly went to a factory in Visegrad and forced seven Bosnian Muslim men to go to the bank of a nearby river, where he shot them repeatedly with an automatic weapon. 
In another incident on 14 June 1992, the three co-indictees allegedly caused the death of approximately 70 people in the village of Bikavac by forcing them into a house that they eventually set on fire. Those who survived sustained serious injuries. 
The amendment also refers to "multiple occasions" between August 1992 and October 1994, in which Lukic, his cousin and other unidentified individuals beat Bosnian Muslim men kept at the detention camp at the Uzamnica military barracks in Visegrad. It also alleges that on numerous occasions, the former paramilitary leader and members of his group assaulted detainees in the camp, inflicting serious and permanent injuries. 
"All of the acts and omissions charged in this indictment were part of a widespread and systematic attack against the Bosnian Muslim civilians and other non-Serb civilians of the municipality of Visegrad and its surrounding area," the indictment says. 
In July, the Belgrade District court sentenced Lukic in absentia to 20 years in prison for the 1992 killing of 16 Muslim men and women from the village of Sjeverin, Serbia, who were kidnapped from a bus. Their bodies were later dumped into a river. 
Announcing Federal Judge Jorge Urso's decision on Wednesday, an Argentine court official did not specify when Lukic would be transferred to the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague. 
