28/02/2008
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 28/02/08
During a two-day meeting in Brussels that ended on (Wednesday) February 27th, political directors of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board expressed deep concern about official calls for secession by the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) entity of Republika Srpska (RS). 
Members of BiH's tripartite presidency, the chairman of its Council of Ministers as well as leaders of the governing coalition in BiH attended the PIC meeting, during which the council discussed the current political situation and the strategy of the international community's future presence in BiH. 
 The council also decided that the Office of the High Representative (OHR) will remain in the country and continue to carry out its mandate under the Dayton Agreement. 
In a communique released after the meeting, the PIC Steering Board insisted that no entity has the right to secede. 
"BiH politicians must end the practice of threatening unilateral changes to the constitutional structure of the country," it said. 
The PIC said that BiH is a recognised sovereign state whose territorial integrity is guaranteed by the Dayton Agreement. The BiH Constitution recognises the country as consisting of two entities and that Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs are constituent peoples. 
The Steering Board also described the damage inflicted on diplomatic offices in Banja Luka during recent protests against Kosovo independence as deplorable. 
"The international community retains the necessary instruments to counter destructive tendencies and that it will not allow attempts to undermine the Dayton Agreement, whether from inside or outside the country," the communique said. 
At the end of the meeting, the international community's top mediator in BiH, High Representative Miroslav Lajcak, said the country is no hostage of Kosovo. 
 "I do not want to speculate about the sentiment of the Serbian nation throughout the region," he added. He also stressed that he will not hesitate to use his Bonn powers to remove officials who are obstructing the peace implementation process. 
"RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik spoke about it at length and he said that he is under pressure. At the same time, the RS authorities were able to control the expressions of this overall Serbian sentiment. I do not expect any further protests or movements that might have the capacity to destabilise the country." 
Lajcak also stressed that the communique was adopted unanimously by all PIC members. Independent observers say this means the Russian diplomats, who openly support Serb opposition to Kosovo's independence, accepted the statements about the territorial integrity of BiH. 
