30/10/2008
(Wall Street Journal, Wall-Street.ro - 30/10/08; Reuters, Bloomberg, AP, AFP, USA Today, Stratfor, Mediapool, Sofia Echo, IMF - 29/10/08)
Bulgaria, Romania and the Baltic nations could be the next to seek protection from the impact of global financial turmoil, analysts said on Wednesday (October 29th), as major institutions confirmed a huge rescue package for Hungary. 
The IMF, the EU and the World Bank said they will make available a total of 20 billion euros to help Hungary's crisis-hit economy get back on track. The IMF will provide 12.5 billon euros under a 17-month standby arrangement, while the EU and the World Bank will contribute 6.5 billion euros and 1 billion euros, respectively. 
IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn said the deal was "designed to restore investor confidence" and mitigate the stress the Hungarian financial markets experienced in recent weeks. 
Hungary's real GDP growth dropped from 3.9% in 2006 to 1.3% in 2007. Beset by a large budget deficit and growing indebtedness, Hungary's currency and stock market were among the worst hit by the global crisis. 
Under the assistance programme, Hungary must implement a series of measures aimed at improving the country's fiscal sustainability and strengthening the financial sector. 
Its rescue package is the largest announced since the crisis started spreading across the globe. 
Despite their strong economic growth levels in recent years, Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia and Romania are "on the brink" and could be next in line for IMF aid, analysts said on Wednesday. 
"I think it's a matter of time before the IMF is called in there," Capital Economics EMEA economist Neil Shearing said. 
 In Bulgaria, banks have moved to restrict mortgage lending in recent weeks, fearing a possible depreciation of the leva. Analysts consider the country's current-account deficit dangerously high. 
Earlier this week, the credit-rating agency Standard & Poor's downgraded Romania's debt rating to "junk", but officials in Bucharest have said they see no need to seek IMF assistance at this stage. 
"We are still talking with [the IMF] for evaluations," said Cristian Popa, deputy governor of the country's central bank. 
