08/06/2010
(Reuters, Zaman, APA - 08/06/10; AP, AFP, DPA, Bloomberg, Hurriyet, World Bulletin, News.az, APA, Trend News Agency, Eurasia Net - 07/06/10)
Turkey and Azerbaijan signed a major deal in Istanbul on Monday (June 7th) that is expected to boost the EU-backed Nabucco natural gas pipeline project, aimed at reducing Europe's dependence on Russian energy supplies. 
Under the agreement, Turkish imports from Azerbaijan's huge Shah Deniz gas fields are set to almost double by 2019, reaching up to 12 billion cubic metres annually. Currently, Turkey gets about 6 billion cubic metres of Caspian natural gas a year from the former Soviet republic and ships part of it to neighbouring Greece. 
 The prolonged talks, dating back to 2008, have delayed the launch of the second phase of the Shah Deniz project, which is now expected to come on line in 2016 at the earliest, adding 16 billion cubic metres of natural gas to the 9 billion cubic metres in Shah Deniz I. 
"Two billion cubic metres of natural gas will be transported through the Shah Deniz II pipeline in 2017, which will be raised to 4 billion cubic metres in 2018, and 6 billion cubic metres in 2019," Turkish Energy Minister Taner Yildiz said after signing the agreement with his Azeri counterpart, Natiq Aliyev. 
The ceremony took place on the eve of the third summit of the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, and was attended by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev. 
According to Reuters, Monday's deal allows Turkey to re-export a portion of the Shah Deniz II gas shipments, boosting its ambition to become a hub for regional and European energy supplies. 
 "Azeri gas is a very important source in meeting the needs of Turkey and European countries in the coming period, in terms of energy security," Yildiz told reporters following the signing ceremony. 
 He noted specifically that the Turkish-Azeri deal "opens the way for securing supplies" for projects included in the EU-backed Southern Corridor energy initiative -- the Nabucco gas pipeline, the Italy-Turkey-Greece Interconnector (ITGI) and the Trans-Adriatic Pipeline (TAP). 
Describing Monday's accord as "historic," the Azeri energy minister said his country plans to ship 10 billion cubic metres of gas annually from Shah Deniz II to Europe. Construction of the long-planned 3,300km Nabucco pipeline, designed to run from Turkey's border with Georgia or Iran to Austria's Baumgarten hub via Bulgaria, Romania and Hungary, is expected to begin next year. The project, considered a key rival of Russia's South Stream gas pipeline, is scheduled to be completed by 2014. It would carry 31 billion cubic metres of natural gas to Europe annually, once it becomes fully operational. 
Reinhard Mitschek, managing director of the Nabucco project, hailed the long-awaited agreement. 
"This is a step ahead in the right direction," he said on Monday. 
The deal, covering a period of 15 years, also sets transit fees for the Azeri gas that will be shipped to Europe via Turkey, as well as a new price for Turkish gas imports from the former Soviet republic to be introduced retroactively, as of April 15th 2008. 
