12/09/2005
(Blic - 12/09/05; AP, Ireland Online - 11/09/05; Reuters, AP, Beta - 10/09/05; Makfax, Radio B92 - 09/09/05)
British Defence Secretary John Reid said on Sunday (11 September) that his country would continue to support efforts aimed at improving security in Kosovo ahead of talks on its future status. 
A long-term improvement to security in the province "is a first and vital step to making sure that we have a stable, sustainable, prosperous future for people in Kosovo," the AP quoted Reid as saying in Pristina, following talks with UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen. The daylong visit was the last leg of Reid's three-day trip to the Balkans, which included a visit to Bosnia and Herzegovina on Friday. 
Britain, which currently holds the rotating EU presidency and is one of the six nations in the so-called Contact Group for Kosovo, has 200 troops deployed in the province, as part of the 17,500-strong NATO-led KFOR. Reid spoke to some of them Sunday. 
His visit came in the wake of an incident late Friday, in which a Kosovo Serb policeman was wounded when his patrol car came under fire near the village of Strpce. His injuries were not life threatening, according to police sources. 
The attack took place near a memorial to former Kosovo Albanian rebels, which was damaged in an explosion the previous day, but it was not immediately clear if the two incidents were related. Police have stepped up the security measures in the area, where two Kosovo Serb men were also killed about two weeks ago. 
The new incidents occurred as UN envoy Kai Eide conducts a review of Kosovo's progress in implementing a set of internationally endorsed democratic standards in eight areas. A positive assessment would open the door to talks on the province's final status, likely to begin later this year. 
According to Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, who serves as OSCE chairman-in-office this year, the report Eide is expected to submit within the coming weeks would support the launch of the Kosovo status talks. 
"I have a feeling that the report, despite all reserves, will be rendered in favour of the beginning of the talks over the future status of Kosovo," the Macedonian news agency Makfax quoted Rupel as saying at a press conference in Ljubljana on Friday. 
While stressing that the contents of the report are not yet known, a US State Department official voiced optimism, "I think that the expectation of the international community is that discussions could begin this autumn," said Rosemary DiCarlo, a deputy assistant to the US secretary of state. 
Refusing to disclose what his recommendations will be, Eide told the Serbian daily Blic that when he completes his report he will submit it to UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, who "will do with it what he finds appropriate". 
