06/07/2004
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 06/07/04
As the Turkish government implements human rights laws aimed at harmonisation with the EU, relations with the country's Kurdish population have begun a new chapter. However, a renewal of armed conflict between Turkish security forces and the separatist terrorist organisation KONGRA-GEL is causing anxiety.
KONGRA-GEL, the successor to the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), declared an end to its five-year ceasefire last month. The PKK's armed campaign was put on hold in 1999, following the capture and imprisonment of its commander, Abdullah Ocalan. Prior to that, PKK-related violence cost nearly 30,000 lives.
A statement from the terrorist organisation blamed the end of the ceasefire on the Turkish government's "destructive operations against militants of the organisation" over the last three months. The military recently vowed once again to maintain its crackdown on KONGRA-GEL until all rebels surrender.
In addition, the group has reportedly been experiencing internal bickering. While some want to drop the guns and gain political ground, others want to remain armed.
In spite of the KONGRA-GEL decision, the government is going ahead with reforms, including the launching of Kurdish broadcasts and language courses. The country originally lifted the ban on broadcasting and teaching in minority languages in 2002, but no action was taken. The issue had long been a source of concern for the political and military establishment, which feared that encouraging minority languages could threaten national unity.
The first broadcasts in Kurdish have now been aired on state-run television, and Kurdish language courses are being offered in southeast Turkey.
As a result of the new legislation, a Turkish court ordered the release of four former lawmakers. They include Nobel Peace Prize nominee Leyla Zana, jailed for nearly 10 years for alleged links to the PKK.
KONGRA-GEL's reasons for ending the ceasefire could be linked to the reforms, analysts say. They argue that the terrorist organisation's efforts are intended to complicate the steps being taken by the government, which threaten to undermine the separatists' base of appeal while also excluding them from the political arena.
