07/03/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 07/03/05
General Momcilo Perisic, indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for war crimes, voluntarily left for The Hague on Monday (7 March). He is the sixth Serbian indictee to do so in the past five months. 
The indictment covers the period between 1993 and 1995. According to Belgrade media reports, the court has charged Perisic with failing to prevent the siege and shelling of Sarajevo, the shelling of Zagreb, and the massacre in Srebrenica. 
From 1993 until 1998, Perisic was the Yugoslav Army's chief of staff. After being dismissed in 1998 for opposing Slobodan Milosevic's Kosovo policy, he formed an opposition party that participated in the post-Milosevic ruling coalition. Perisic was a deputy prime minister until March 2002, when he left amid charges that he had divulged military secrets. However, he was never tried on those charges, because of his immunity as a member of parliament. 
The Serbian and federal governments have welcomed Perisic's decision to go to The Hague. Last week, Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic said the move demonstrated Perisic's "high responsibility towards the people of Serbia-Montenegro and their future in Europe." 
Faced with ongoing criticism over the slow pace of co-operation, Serbian authorities are hoping that voluntary surrenders will help obtain a positive feasibility study on Serbia-Montenegro's bid to join the EU. International officials, however, have voiced dissatisfaction with this approach, noting that key indictees -- such as Bosnian Serb wartime commander Ratko Mladic -- remain in hiding and have shown no inclination to turn themselves in. 
Earlier this month, chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte told Austrian TV that Serbian authorities have, for the first time, acknowledged that Mladic is on Serbian territory. Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica denied this, however, saying that the government "has checked" and not found Mladic in Serbia. 
Meanwhile, Kostunica and the head of the federal council for co-operation with the ICTY, Rasim Llajic, both say that new surrenders will be coming by the end of March. According to analysts, these will likely include former police general Sreten Lukic and former army general Nebojsa Pavkovic. 
ICTY physicians examined Lukic in Belgrade in early March and found him fit to travel to The Hague, despite recent heart surgery. Pavkovic could be a bigger problem. His lawyer claims that he is sick, but he has so far refused examination by ICTY physicians. It is widely believed that both Pavkovic and Lukic must face justice if Serbia is to have any hope of obtaining a positive feasibility study, which Kostunica insists is a top government priority. 
