10/06/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/06/10 
Despite doubts during the qualifiers, Serbia has made it through to the World Cup. The team even finished first in the qualification group, ahead of favourites France and Romania. 
Those results brought back some of the confidence shattered by the team's failure to qualify for the 2008 European Championship, not to mention the debacle four years ago at the World Cup in Germany. 
Leading the charge is head coach Radomir Antic, a veteran of Serbian football. He played for Belgrade's famed Partizan club in the late 1960s and 1970s, when the team became two-time champion of the formidable Yugoslavian first league. 
"I remember Antic well, he was a very good defender who was incredibly persistent," journalist Branko Vicentijevic told SETimes. 
Antic, 66, was born in Zitiste, northern Serbia, but his football roots are tied to Uzice, in southern Serbia, where he played for the local team Sloboda. In 1967, he joined Partizan, which a year earlier had reached the European Champions Cup final with Real Madrid. 
"It was not easy in those years to come to Partizan from Sloboda," Vicentijevic notes. 
In 1976, Antic left for Istanbul's Fenerbahce, and later joined Spain's Real Zaragoza and England's Luton. The British fans remember Antic for the goal he scored in 1983 against Manchester City -- four minutes before the game ended. That feat enabled Luton to stay on in England's top division. 
Antic became assistant coach for Partizan in 1985, where he worked for three years. However, his first independent coaching job was at Real Zaragoza, which reached fifth place in the Spanish league. 
Real Zaragoza was a stepping stone for the coveted coaching position at Real Madrid in 1991 -- during a time the Spanish megaclub struggled. Antic did manage to guide Real Madrid to third place in the Spanish league and the European cups. 
The following year, Real Madrid was placed first in the first half of the season, seven points ahead of its competitors. However, Antic was dismissed without a clear explanation and Real did not win the Spanish championship. 
Antic's biggest coaching success came in 1996, when he led Atletico Madrid to victory in the Spanish national league as well as the King's Cup. 
Searching for new challenges, Antic joined Barcelona in 2003, when the famed club was ranked 15th in the Spanish league. He helped the club qualify for the Champions League, but Barcelona's owners dismissed him and brought in a new coach. 
Antic took over leadership of the Serbian national team in 2008, after a four-year break. Given his coaching results, he was also actively sought by Munich's Bayern and Manchester City, but remained loyal to Serbia. 
Antic likes to vacation on Mount Zlatibor, near Uzice, where he joined the world of football. "He has not forgotten his first club, Sloboda," Uzice journalist Zanka Eric told SETimes. "He helps young soccer players there and buys equipment or whatever else the club may need." 
While some believe the Serbian squad has already exceeded expectations by making into the Cup, Antic says the world has not yet seen all his players have to offer. Serbia, he promises, will play its heart out as it seeks to outperform its German, Australian and Ghanean opponents in Group D. 
"There is nothing more wonderful than defending the colors of your country, but at the same time, it is a great obligation to always be worthy of your people -- to be a winner," he said."The road to South Africa showed that we are ready for the challenges and are finding the right solutions." 
