28/11/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 28/11/05
The UN special envoy for negotiations on Kosovo's future status, Martti Ahtisaari, left Belgrade on Friday (25 November) after talks with top officials there. The visit was part of a fact-finding tour of the region that began with an earlier stop in the Kosovo capital, Pristina. 
Expressing satisfaction with the talks so far, Ahtisaari said he has gathered a lot of information that he has yet to analyse. He also said he hopes the first direct meeting of the Serbian and Albanian representatives would take place in early 2006. 
"I hope that in the first part of the new year we will be able to bring the two sides together. We will mediate, if the sides wish it," Ahtisaari said. He confirmed that neither the Kosovo Albanian nor the Serb side has abandoned its stance. The Albanians want independence, while the Serbian officials believe that the province, under international administration since 1999, should remain part of Serbia in some way. 
Ahtisaari reiterated that there was no timeframe for the status talks, but added, "If the international community has decided to go ahead with the negotiations, then that means the current status quo cannot be maintained any longer." The special envoy also said that he opposes the division of Kosovo. 
While in Belgrade, Ahtisaari met with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic and Serbian President Boris Tadic. The Serbian government presented the envoy with a parliamentary resolution opposing independence for Kosovo. Draskovic laid out Belgrade's case against independence during his talks with the envoy, arguing that such a move would send "a series of shock waves throughout this region of the Balkans, as well as throughout Europe and the world". 
Kostunica, meanwhile, suggested to Ahtisaari that he also meet with the state representatives of neighbouring countries -- including Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania -- when he is next in the region. 
On his second day in Belgrade, Ahtisaari met with Tadic, who told him that "a special solution for Kosovo's future status must be found, which will equally satisfy the interest of all local ethnic communities within Serbia-Montenegro's sovereignty and territorial integrity." 
Prior to the UN envoy's arrival, Serbia's 13-member team for the status negotiations was formed. It includes Tadic, Kostunica and Draskovic. The team's permanent adviser is Thomas Fleiner, a law professor at the University of Fribourg in Switzerland and head of the Institute of Federalism. 
After leaving Belgrade, Ahtisaari travelled on to Montenegro, Albania and Macedonia. 
