31/01/2006
(EU, DTT-NET, Radio B92, Beta, FENA, AP, EurActiv - 30/01/06)
EU foreign ministers warned Serbia-Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Monday (30 January) that full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) remains a key condition for their progress towards European integration. During a meeting of the EU Council in Brussels, the bloc's top diplomats urged the two countries to hand over all indictees, particularly the tribunal's top two, former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military chief, Ratko Mladic. 
"While welcoming the parties' declared commitment to continue implementation of the reform agenda, the Council recalled that the pace and conclusion of negotiations on Stabilisation and Association Agreements (SAA) with these countries will depend inter alia on full co-operation with the ICTY," a statement on the conclusions of Monday's meeting read. 
"The Council called on both countries to take decisive action to ensure that remaining fugitive indictees, notably Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, are finally brought to justice in The Hague. Full co-operation with the ICTY is essential to achieve lasting reconciliation in the region and lift a fundamental obstacle on the way towards the EU," it added. 
In a report to the UN Security Council last month, UN war crimes chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte criticised Belgrade for failing to capture Mladic, who she maintains is hiding in Serbia under military protection. Karadzic, meanwhile, is widely believed to be hiding in Serb-run parts of BiH. Both fugitives have remained at large for more than ten years since they were initially charged with war crimes, including genocide. 
EU officials involved in the SAA talks with Serbia-Montenegro and BiH have been warning in recent weeks about the possible suspension of negotiations in the event of a continued lack of co-operation with the ICTY. 
Last week, Serbian authorities arrested Jovo Djogo, a retired Bosnian Serb army colonel and a former close aide of Mladic, for allegedly helping the fugitive evade capture. The move was described as aimed at "busting the network of people suspected of helping with the hiding of the former Bosnian Serb army commander". 
Serbian officials have also promised that a report with the names of army officers who have been in contact with Mladic will be published this week. 
Apart from the ICTY co-operation issue, the Council also discussed developments in BiH and Kosovo, as well as the upcoming independence referendum in Montenegro. It urged all parties in the republic to co-operate with each other and with EU special envoy Miroslav Lajcak. 
"Ensuring a broad consensus on the modalities of the referendum in Montenegro, and conducting it in line with international standards, will provide the process and the outcome with the necessary legitimacy and sustainability," the statement on Monday's meeting said. 
The foreign ministers also applauded a new European Commission strategy for the Western Balkans, seeking to promote trade, investment, economic and social development in the region and to facilitate its integration into the European mainstream. "The EU remains committed to helping the Western Balkan countries on their road to the EU through practical measures to make the European perspective more tangible," the ministers stressed. 
