06/11/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times - 06/11/07
US President George W. Bush pledged on Monday (November 5th) to step up military and intelligence co-operation with Turkey to eliminate the threat posed by Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) terrorists. 
"The PKK is an enemy of Turkey, a free Iraq, and the United States of America. And it's in our joint interest to work effectively to deal with the problem," Bush said following his meeting with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan at the White House. 
Bush suggested it was not in Turkey's interest to launch a major unilateral incursion into northern Iraq, as such a move could spark confrontation with Iraqi Kurds and lead to greater instability in the region. 
Instead, the US president said, Washington and Ankara should work together to combat the problem. 
"Step one is to make sure that our intelligence-sharing is good," Bush told Erdogan. "Good, sound intelligence delivered on a real-time basis, using modern technology, will make it much easier to deal effectively with people who are using murder as a weapon to achieve political objectives." 
Erdogan welcomed Bush's promise, but said his country had no plans to withdraw the estimated 100,000 troops massed on the border with Iraq. "We are not after a war, but we have a mandate from the Turkish Parliament to conduct an operation," he said. 
 Erdogan's government has come under mounting public pressure to crack down on PKK bases in northern Iraq, following some of the deadliest attacks by the terrorist group in years. 
After Monday's meeting, Turkish Deputy Chief of Staff General Ergun Saygun and other top Turkish military officials met with their US counterparts to discuss the details of stronger military and intelligence co-operation against the PKK. 
Bush had earlier suggested reviving the three-way military mechanism among Turkey, the US and Iraq, and establishing better communication channels between top Turkish and US military officials, including the US commander in Iraq, General David Petraeus. 
 On Monday, Iraqi Kurdish Regional Prime Minister Necirvan Barzani proposed four-party talks among his administration, Ankara, Baghdad and Washington for a "diplomatic, negotiated" solution. 
The PKK problem "has become a transnational issue, complicated by ethnic ties", he said. 
 However, the head of the foreign affairs committee in the Turkish parliament, Murat Mercan, turned down the suggestion, saying Turkey's only counterpart is the Iraqi central government. He also accused the Iraqi Kurdish regional government of providing logistical support to the PKK. 
According to Mercan, details of any future policy will be hammered out during talks between Turkish and US military officials. However, he said, these will not be shared with the press due to operational considerations. 
"Our political, economic and military efforts to eliminate the PKK threat will continue with stronger measures," Mercan said. It is up to the Turkish armed forces to decide on the timing and the scope of a cross-border operation, he added. 
