22/08/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/08/12 
Armed with special training, laptops, cell phones and connections to the state, 1,650 previously unemployed agricultural engineering graduates spread across Serbia as part of a comprehensive project to improve production and minimise costs through direct consultation with farmers. 
But on August 4th, during their first week on the job, the ministry of agriculture abruptly fired them and ended the programme, which had been started by the former Democratic Party-led government. 
The programme, created last November, aimed to serve 300,000 farms by using the graduates as liaisons to the ministry and other officials. All the workers had to take training and pass aptitude tests. According to organisers, 20 percent had to relocate. 
The project was financed from the state budget and estimated to last for one year. 
But, the new state government, under the Serbian Progressive Party, said the programme was not needed. 
"We have a budget deficit and it would be much better to use money to directly help the drought instead of for engineers' salaries," Agriculture Minister Goran Knezevic said in a statement. 
Advocates of the program were disappointed and said the program would have been well worth the investment. 
Project co-ordinator Svetlana Veljkovic said without the programme, the number of farmers taking agricultural subsidies would increase from 90,000 to 260,000 in less than one year. Farmers will also spend an average of 10 working days in government offices seeking help, she said. 
"All that money is significantly more than our entire project costs," she told SETimes. "Other non-financial help amounts to tens of millions of euros." 
The worst part of it is that the farmers will be without expert help and information about state measures and potential EU funds, she said. 
Other experts share the opinion that these layoffs could have negative consequences for agricultural sector, as well as for society in general. 
"The message is that our state does not need these people and their expertise," Miladin Sevrlic, professor at the Agricultural Faculty in Belgrade and president of the Association of Agricultural Engineers and Technicians of Serbia, told SETimes. "It opens the question 'Why do agricultural faculties exist?' and explains why the best experts are leaving the country." 
He also stressed that this is very bad time to fire them because their knowledge could be valuable to an agricultural census performed in mid-October. 
Branislav Gulan, Serbian Chamber of Commerce research associate and member of the board for the village of Serbian Academy of Sciences and Art, agreed. He said that the agronomists are essential and have a place in 4,600 villages across Serbia. 
"Our agriculture and villages are in deep crises, financial and intellectual, which means that these people will be very helpful to our farmers since the farmers don’t have needed knowledge," he said. "Our agriculture needs them also because the rural production is increasing constantly." 
While advisory projects in agriculture have been a trend in west European countries for quite some time, in Southeast Europe it has only just begun. In some countries like Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania, this sector is covered by the state and farmers use it to get free advice. These countries have a huge number of small family farms with numerous issues. 
Serbia has 228 agricultural advisers to handle its 500,000 registered farms, 780,000 family farms and more than 4 million hectares of arable land. 
Croatia has the same number of counsellors for 150,000 registered farms with about 1.2 million hectares land. Even Slovenia, with only 55,000 farms with 170,000 hectares of land has three times more advisers in relation to the number of farms. 
Vesna and Zoran Antic live in a small village in North Serbia where they produce poultry meat and eggs at their modest house farm. They indicated that they would love to increase production but do not have enough financial resources to do it. 
"Everything we have, we are making with our four hands, but we want more because we are pretty sure that our land has potential," Zoran Antic said. "But we need expert help." 
