29/03/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 29/03/11
Tirana's Serious Crimes Court on Sunday (March 26th) ordered the detention of businessman Dhimiter Harizaj on charges of involvement in international drug trafficking. The arrest follows the seizure of 200kg of cocaine -- found mixed into a shipment of palm oil. 
Harizaj made no statement in court. His lawyer said he had only purchased the palm oil and knew nothing about the concealed cocaine. 
The stash, seized in Gjirokastra on March 22nd, is the largest quantity of smuggled cocaine ever to have been found by Albanian authorities. Prosecutors say the police acted on information provided by international counterparts. "
The development of the operation to intercept the narcotic was conducted under the authority of the Attorney General that granted special methods of controlled delivery, based on the demand of foreign counterparts," the General Prosecutor's Office said in a statement. "The cocaine originated in Colombia and traveled the drug route Colombia, Spain, Belgium, Austria, Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia, Macedonia, Albania." 
Three government agencies -- the General Prosecutor's Office, Prosecutor's Office for Serious Crimes and the General Police Directorate -- collaborated in the action, officials said. 
The lorry carrying the cocaine had Macedonian license plates. Police reportedly allowed it to travel along its route and then intercepted it at its final destination. 
The Albanian daily Shqip quoted investigators as saying authorities in Spain were aware of the cocaine shipment but asked Albania not to take action until its destination was clear. T
he seized cocaine has an estimated minimum value of 15m euros wholesale, and about 50m euros when distributed in small quantities, the newspaper said. 
The two drivers of the lorry were released by Albanian police and returned home to Kumanovo, Macedonia. They told police they had no knowledge that their truck was carrying anything other than ten tonnes of palm oil, the Skopje-based Zhurnal portal reported. 
Belgian authorities have now arrived to Albania and are helping to lay the investigative groundwork for the case. More arrests are expected, sources said. 
