23/07/2011
(Reuters, AP, The Foreigner, BBC - 23/07/11; Di-Ve, AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, Xinhua - 22/07/11) 
At least seven people died and 16 were injured in an explosion at the government headquarters in Oslo, Norway, on Friday (July 22nd). The police said the deadly blast that caused severe material damage and spread chaos in the streets of the capital was caused by a car bomb. 
Only two hours after the blast, a man went on a killing spree in a youth camp on the Utoeya Island, leaving at least 84 people dead. The police have arrested the perpetrator, who media has identified as 32-year-old Norwegian Anders Behring Breivik. Reporters say Breivik has links with right-wing extremism. 
"We have no more information than ... what has been found on [his] websites, which is that is goes toward the right [wing] and that it is, so to speak, Christian fundamentalist," deputy police chief Roger Andresen told reporters on Saturday as police remained unclear about the possible motives behind the deadly acts. 
A local police spokesperson speaking on the condition of anonymity told AP that the attacker does not seem to have any connections with international terror organisations. "It seems it's not Islamic-terror related. This seems like a madman's work." 
Eyewitnesses said the shooter was wearing a police uniform. He arrived on the island and started shooting indiscriminately at participants in an annual event of the ruling Workers' Youth League. The teenagers started running in chaos, with some jumping into the water to escape. 
Police said they are still searching the island and the waters around it, warning the death toll may increase. They also said they fear there may be a bomb on the island. Some media reported the police have found undetonated explosives there, suggesting a connection between the Oslo bombing and the killing spree are highly possible, a version that investigators are working on. 
"A paradise island has been transformed into a hell," Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg told a press conference on Saturday. Commenting on the possible motives of the attacks, he said "I wouldn't say we have a big problem with right-wing extremists in Norway. But we have had some groups, we have followed them before, and our police is aware that there are some right-wing groups." 
The international community condemned the attacks. 
"I condemn in the strongest terms these acts of cowardice for which there is no justification,” EU President Herman van Rompuy said in a statement. 
EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton said on the European Council's website that "Norway is famous for actively promoting peace in the world and such shocking attack is unprecedented." She vowed the EU's support for the country in this difficult moment. 
In a message to Jens, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso expressed his "deepest condolences" to the victims of the attack and their families. 
NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen also denounced the incidents. 
"I would like to convey my sincere condolences to the Norwegian government, the Norwegian people and the families and loved ones of all those who suffered in these cruel and cowardly acts," he said, pointing out that NATO members stand united in the battle against these acts of violence. 
