21/03/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 21/03/07 
The Macedonian government is making an effort to provide computer access to every primary and secondary school student in the country. In two separate tenders, it plans to provide a total of 150,000 computers to boost information technology skills and promote computer-based education. 
The first tender, for 100,000 computers, already has been announced, and the equipment is expected to arrive this autumn. Secondary schools will be the first to receive the computers, followed by primary schools. The government is organising special tutorials to help train teachers in computer-based instruction. 
"The goal of the project is to enable every student to have a computer on their desk and have access to all subjects taught via the computer," Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski said at a March 13th press conference. 
Statistics suggest that there is one computer per 56 students in Macedonia's schools. While welcoming the government's plans to improve the schools, some educators wonder about the feasibility. Schools in rural environments lack adequate desks and chairs and sometimes have to go without electricity, says one teacher in the village of Zelenikovo, near Skopje. In such conditions, he suggests, it may be premature to worry about computers. 
The government also is launching a new initiative to construct 100 new school buildings and 100 new gyms, to be built in collaboration with the private sector. 
"By means of announcements and tenders, private companies will be invited to develop school facilities on concession and own them for a certain number of years. Meanwhile, local self-government will pay rent," Gruevski explained. 
A tender for the provision of school buildings and gyms will be announced in two months. Local mayors will be asked to specify the number of schools needed in their respective areas, and will decide where the facilities should be constructed 
The idea is in part meant to create the conditions for introducing compulsory education, something the Gruevski administration strongly supports. Opposition parties say it is impossible, due to insufficient school buildings. They accuse the prime minister of simply playing empty word games to retain public support. 
The government hopes its initiative to build new schools and gyms will help solve the problem, allowing it to move ahead with a compulsory system. 
