16/12/2005
(Blic - 16/12/05; AP, AFP, BTA, MIA, Makfax, Focus News Agency, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Xinhua - 15/12/05)
The presidents of Bulgaria and Serbia, Georgi Parvanov and Boris Tadic, voiced hope Thursday (15 December) that Macedonia's bid to win formal recognition as an EU candidate state would not be jeopardised by the ongoing budget dispute within the Union. 
A positive decision on Macedonia's bid would be in the interests of the Balkan region and Europe itself, Parvanov and Tadic said Thursday after two days of talks with Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski at the lake resort of Ohrid, about 100km southwest of Skopje. 
Macedonia's case is one of the contentious issues on the agenda of the two-day EU summit, which began in Brussels on Thursday. Citing a draft copy of the summit's conclusions, an AFP report suggested that the Balkan country would likely be granted EU candidate status Friday, provided the leaders of the 25-nation bloc are able to strike a deal on the Union's 2007-2013 budget. 
German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said on Thursday there is resistance to Macedonia's candidacy from four EU members who want to tie the issue to a general review of the EU's enlargement plans. In an address to the German Parliament, he affirmed his country's support for Skopje's bid. 
Meanwhile, speaking at a press conference with his Bulgarian and Serbian counterparts, Crvenkovski urged the EU to grant candidate status for Macedonia "by Friday evening at the latest". 
"The EU can't allow Macedonia to become the victim in the dispute on the Union's budget, because this issue is not related to Macedonia," he said. Parvanov, whose country is scheduled to join the EU in January 2007, said that Sofia's ambition was not only to meet its entry target date, but to also stand as a firm supporter of the EU membership prospects of all Western Balkan countries. 
The main focus of the Ohrid talks was regional co-operation, particularly in the sectors of energy and infrastructure. Parvanov has proposed that the implementation of projects for the construction of transport and energy distribution networks be based on a public-private partnership. 
Crvenkovski expressed his country's support for Bulgaria's plans to build a nuclear power plant in Belene, while Tadic said that Serbia must still discuss the issue. 
The three presidents agreed that the issue of the region's gasification needs to be seriously considered by both experts and the relevant officials, as it is in the common interest of the nations concerned. 
What is new, Parvanov said, is not only the common goals behind the expressed positions, but the message that is being sent to Europe and potential investors, which is that the new atmosphere in the Balkans reduces the political risks for investment in the region. 
Kosovo's status was another key issue the three leaders discussed during their meeting. Whatever the outcome of the negotiations on the province's future, it should not destabilise the region, they said. 
"We will support any solution for Kosovo, agreed between Belgrade and Pristina under international mediation, which will not endanger regional stability," Crvenkovski said. 
Echoing his Macedonian counterpart's words, Parvanov stressed that the solution should ensure that Kosovo's multiethnic character is preserved and that the rights of all ethnic communities are protected in line with UN standards. 
"Serbia wants a compromise solution acceptable for all," said Tadic. "Serbia wants to preserve Kosovo as a unit and is not suggesting division of the province," he added. 
