15/04/2013
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/04/13
Officials in Pristina are initiating projects to reduce the country's high rate of unemployment, and several other regional governments are following suit. 
Unemployment remains at a critical level in Kosovo, as 45 percent of the country's work force is jobless. However, some unemployment problems are harder to tackle than others, one of them being corruption. 
Arben Qollaku, a political sciences graduate, has applied for 424 jobs. Only in October 2012, Qollaku was hired as a human rights officer in the Kosovo Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 
"I was not selected for a job because I had no connections, didn't know a person that could hire me," Qollaku told SETimes. "Nepotism prevails, and is still is present in employment in [Kosovo] state institutions." 
His struggle to find a job in Kosovo illustrates only some of the issues besetting Kosovo employment. 
According to the 2013 Business Insider Misery Index that reflects on a country's unemployment and inflation, Kosovo scored among the 10 lowest in the world. By the end of 2012, out of 1.7 million Kosovo citizens more than 260,000 were jobless. 
The citizens' plight has sparked the government to develop certain employment programmes for 2013, according to the ministry of labour and social welfare. 
"A few hundred jobs will open in co-ordination with the UN Development Programme, 170 students will do seasonal work in Germany, hundreds of others will be employed in agriculture ministry projects,” Behxhet Gaxhiqi, the ministry's spokesperson, told SETimes. 
However, the most job openings are expected from the Kosvet-6 project, an EU supported programme to assist the government in improving the quality and efficiency of education and employment prospects. About 1,700 unemployed citizens will receive training and jobs. 
According to official data, more than 60 percent of young people between ages 18 and 35 are jobless in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
Ranko Markus, the head of the BiH youth employment programme, a project conducted by German's consulting agency GAPA, said the project opened 1,528 jobs for educated young people. 
"Some [think] someone will come along and open a factory and employ 5,000 people on the spot. It won't happen. The key is to educate the unemployed to search for a job, not just wait for a call from the unemployment bureau for a job offer," Markus told SETimes. 
Employers consider job creation costly, adding that companies today are increasingly looking for ways to reduce costs. 
"It would not be a problem for me to open five new jobs, but the state must reduce the employers' costs and taxes paid for their workers. At times, a worker's pay check is lower than taxes the employer pays to the state. Better business environment will reduce unemployment," Danilo Vraca, director of the Novoform textile factory from Drvar, central BiH, told SETimes. 
Ivana Nikolic, an IT manager, lost her job with a private, international telecom company in Serbia that collapsed in 2009. Since then, she has been job searching without any success. 
"I send my CV to almost all internet job ads, attend interviews scheduled by friends or former partners, but still can't find a job for more than three years. I'm officially unemployed and once every three months must attend the National Employment Service to extend my unemployed status," Nikolic told SETimes. 
According to the Serbian Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, the institutional and legal framework employment policy has been improved significantly in recent years, with new laws and the adoption of a National Employment Strategy for 2011 to 2020. 
"The National Strategy has priorities and directions, some of which are employment encouraging in the less developed regions and development of regional and local employment policies, human capital quality improvement, development of institutional capacity and expansion of active labour market programs," the ministry told SETimes. 
 Correspondents Drazen Remikovic in Banja Luka and Ivana Jovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report.  
 What can the government do to improve the employment situation? Let us know in the comments below.  
