10/06/2005
(Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Vseki Den - 05/06/05; Sofia News Agency - 04/06/05; MBMD)
Fifty per cent of eligible voters in Bulgaria definitely plan to participate in the 25 June parliamentary elections, the head of the Bulgarian MBMD polling agency said Sunday (5 June), announcing the results of a new survey. Those figures, Mira Yanova said, would likely benefit smaller parties, particularly former Prime Minister Ivan Kostov's Democrats for Strong Bulgaria (DSB), which would likely be able to surpass the 4 per cent threshold for entry into parliament. 
Should the voter turnout reach 60 per cent, however, the right-wing DSB would probably not pass the threshold, according to Yanova. Nor would the nationalist, anti-Roma coalition Ataka, which has gained support recently. 
The poll, conducted through direct door-to-door interviews with 1,213 eligible voters during the last five days of May, confirms that -- irrespective of the turnout -- none of the five parties and coalitions stands a chance to win a majority. Previous surveys have also suggested a majority is out of reach. 
According to the MBMD survey, in addition to the 50 per cent who say they will definitely participate in the elections, another 16 per cent indicate they will vote but have not decided for whom yet. Thirteen per cent of the respondents said they were still uncertain whether they would vote, while 20 per cent do not plan to cast a ballot. 
In the event of a 65 per cent voter turnout, and after a recalculation of the actual vote, the left-wing Coalition for Bulgaria, led by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP), would win 38.2 per cent of the vote, Yanova said. The current ruling National Movement Simeon-II would follow with 23.1 per cent, the United Democratic Forces (UtDF) with 11.6 per cent, the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) with 8.8 per cent and the Bulgarian People's Union (BPU) with 5.9 per cent. Under this scenario, the DSB would only get 3.8 per cent of the vote and the Ataka coalition 2.7 per cent. 
Based on these results, the MBMD predicts the following distribution of seats in Bulgaria's next 240-seat assembly: 103 or 104 for the Coalition for Bulgaria, 63 or 64 for the NMS-II, 32 for the UtDF, 24 for the MRF and 16 for the BPU. 
The BSP have indicated that even if they were to win a majority they would still try to form a coalition government. The MRF, which has participated in different coalition governments over the past 15 years, appears to be the most likely partner. 
In other news, Boyko Borrisov, a leading figure on the NMS-II ticket and one of the country's most popular public figures, has announced he is suspending his candidacy. While he did not give a reason, the decision comes a day after reports that authorities have foiled a plot against his life, reportedly involving Serbian underworld groups. 
