22/07/2009
(DPA, Beta, Serbian Government - 21/07/09; Reuters, AP, DPA, AKI, CNN, BBC, France 24, Guardian, UN News Centre, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - 20/07/09)
Serbian officials welcomed on Tuesday (July 21st) the sentences handed down to two Bosnian Serbs for their role in war crimes committed against Bosnian Muslim civilians in the town of Visegrad between 1992 and 1994. 
On Monday, the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) found Milan Lukic, 42, guilty of burning alive at least 119 Bosniaks in two incidents in June 1992 and killing another 12 on the banks of the Drina River. The leader of a wartime Bosnian Serb paramilitary unit called White Eagles or Avengers was convicted on 21 counts of crimes against humanity and violations of laws or customs of war and was sentenced to life in prison. 
His cousin Sredoje Lukic, 48, who was a policeman in Visegrad and a member of the same paramilitary group, received a 30-year prison sentence for aiding and abetting in the commission of inhumane acts, murder and cruel treatment. ICTY judges ruled that his presence at the scene of one of the incidents, in which 60 civilians were burnt to death, had not been proven. 
Serbia's council for co-operation with the UN tribunal said on Tuesday that the sentences were consistent with the "monstrous" crimes committed by the Lukic cousins. "The National Council hopes that these sentences will at least partially contribute to bringing justice to the victims and their families, bearing in mind that these were unthinkable and horrific crimes, committed against the civilian population in the Visegrad municipality," Belgrade-based Beta news agency quoted the panel as saying in a statement. 
Bruno Vekaric, spokesperson for Serbia's war crimes prosecutor's office, also welcomed Monday's ruling, describing it as a "legal victory" for the ICTY team of prosecutors, headed by Belgian lawyer Serge Brammertz. 
 "Milan Lukic, sentenced to life imprisonment, will be remembered in the history of our unfortunate wars for burning live children, women and old people and other vicious crimes," the German news agency DPA quoted him as saying in remarks to Belgrade media. 
Milan Lukic, who was arrested in Argentina in August 2005 and transferred to The Hague nearly seven months later, was tried in absentia by a Belgrade court six years ago. He was convicted on charges of torturing and killing 16 Muslim civilians, abducted from a bus travelling from Serbia to Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992, and was given the maximum sentence of 20 years. 
Bosniaks also welcomed the sentences given to the two cousins Monday. Sarajevo-based daily Dnevni Avaz noted in an editorial that the decision to give Milan Lukic the maximum sentence "slowly brought back the shaken faith in the ICTY", the DPA reported. 
But the proceedings are likely not over yet. The cousins "have the opportunity to appeal to the second-level appeal council, which they will certainly do", Dusan Ignjatovic, director of the office for co-operation with The Hague tribunal, told Serbian broadcaster RTS. 
