16/08/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 16/08/10
According to the latest public survey conducted by the Directorate for European Integration (DEI) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), about 90% of respondents support the country's EU integration. Such a high percentage of public support for this process should serve as an incentive for all to implement reforms on the path towards EU membership, says DEI BiH Director Nevenka Savic. 
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Savic talks about requirements that BiH must fulfill before joining the EU. 
SETimes: What are your thoughts on the current status of EU integration for BiH, and what are the DEI's main obstacles in the quest for country's integration? 
Nevenka Savic: According to the common assessments both of the representatives of BiH and of the European Commission, from the second meeting of the Interim Committee and the meetings of Interim Subcommittees, as joint bodies for monitoring of implementation of the Interim Agreement, the Interim Agreement has been implemented in a satisfactory manner. The ratification of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement is also going well and it is expected to come into force during this year. 
However, at the above-mentioned meetings, the representatives of the EC indicated open issues in terms of BiH's commitments arising from the European Partnership and the Interim Agreement/SAA, which need to be resolved as soon as possible. 
These involve the adoption of the Law on the Census of Population, adoption of the Law on State Aid, harmonisation of the BiH Constitution with the European Convention on Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and adoption of the Law on Transport of Harmful Matters. 
As a permanent body of the BiH Council of Ministers, in charge of the co-ordination of activities for all institutions related to the European integration process in technical and operational sense, DEI has been regularly completing tasks from the scope of its competency. 
However, delays related to reaching political consensus on some relevant issues in the context of meeting obligations have affected progress in the European integration process in general. 
Given that efficient co-ordination of activities in the EU accession process is one of the pillars of European integration, the Directorate has launched measures aimed at improving this co-ordination, and has held a number of meetings with the representatives from institutions at all government levels. 
SETimes: The EU Council has announced liberalisation of the visa regime for BiH this autumn, if all technical requirements are met. Can you explain what these conditions might be and which of the requirements have yet to be met? 
Savic: On May 27th, the EU adopted the proposal for the non-visa regime for the citizens of BiH and Albania who possess biometric passports. What has been left to do is for BiH to continue working on meeting of the three requirements: strengthening capacities for implementation and efficient application of the legal framework for the fight against organised crime and corruption; continued implementation of the Action Plan for Establishment of Electronic Data Exchange, and harmonisation of the criminal codes of the entities and the Brcko District with the state-level one. 
I believe that the approval of the non-visa regime for the BiH citizens would constitute a significant motivation factor and a strong catalyst for the overall process of BiH's approximation to the EU. 
SETimes: How does the DEI interact and reconcile with other state-level ministries and agencies when dealing with issues pertaining to the visa liberalisation process? Which requirements have been met and what still remains to be settled? 
Savic: The DEI is not a leading institution for the co-ordination of activities in the process of meeting requirements for the liberalisation of the visa regime. Upon delivery of the Road Map for Liberalisation of the Visa Regime, the BiH Council of Ministers established an Inter-Disciplinary Working Group to monitor the implementation of the reforms and the requirements identified in the Road Map, headed by Samir Rizvo from the BiH Ministry of Security. 
It is important to say that the example of meeting of the requirements from the road map has shown that very demanding and numerous reforms can be implemented in BiH in a short timeframe -- this is a very positive message for both the EU and for us in BiH. 
SETimes: Can you give us an estimate of when BiH could file an application for EU membership and when accession negotiations can begin? 
Savic: In general, the application for EU membership should be filed once a European country (in line with Article 49, of the EU Treaty) has accomplished good results in implementation of reforms in the previous phase of the European integration process, and once positive signals have arrived from the EU that the moment is good to submit the application. 
The "Enlargement Strategy and Key Challenges 2009-2010" states that the EU shall not be able to consider BiH's application for membership until the OHR has been closed down. 
The DEI has launched measures to improve co-ordination in the European Integration process, and has made a number of consultations on this topic with the representatives from the state, entity and BIH Brcko District levels. 
The aim of these consultations is to reach consensus on an improved model of co-operation in order to make the institutions in BiH more prepared for the complex tasks lying ahead. 
