14/06/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori and Ivana Jovanovic Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 14/06/13
Kosovo and Serbia are the first countries in the region to implement EU-based regulations to protect air passengers' rights. 
General rules on compensation and assistance to passengers in the event of the cancellation or long delay of flights are part of the new guidelines. 
Airlines are obliged to provide beverages and food, and help passengers make free phone calls if a flight is delayed or cancelled. Depending on the length of delay, the airline will also be required to monetarily compensate passangers, from 250 to 600 euros depending on the distance of the flight; refund ticket prices; or provide an alternative flight. If the traveller needs to wait overnight for a new flight, the airline must provide accommodation. 
Passengers' rights are always important, but especially in the summer, when number of flights is higher, Katarina Andric Milosavljevic, public relations advisor at the Civil Aviation Directorate of Serbia, told SETimes. 
"It is important for passengers to bear in mind that when they buy a plane ticket, they actually sign a contract of carriage with a certain airline," Milosavljevic said. "If, for any reason, the carriage is not realised or it is not as it was supposed to be, the traveller's rights are based on the ticket." 
The Civil Aviation Directorate in Serbia has started a public awareness campaign about air passengers' rights via the Civil Aviation Directorate web page, phone and media. 
"I'm not well informed of my rights as an airline passenger. Neither my travel agent nor the carrier take that into account. In fact, it seems to me that it's up to the passenger and his/her motivation to do the research and get informed," Senka Korac, 30, of Belgrade, told SETimes. 
The Infrastructure Ministry of Kosovo has taken several steps to inform air passengers about their rights through posters they placed in Pristina International Airport, leaflets in airlines' kiosks and their Internet site, ministry officials said. 
At the airport, passengers can also find "the complaint form which must be submitted to the airline company responsible for the transfer of the passenger," Ismail Berisha, acting director of the Civil Aviation Department at Kosovo's Ministry of Infrastructure, told SETimes. 
The ministry, which will implement the new rules, will step in if the airline refuses to fulfill its obligations to the traveller. 
Safet Sahiti, a doctor from Pristina, said the he travels often, but has only recently started asking for compensation from airlines. 
"It was my fault that I was not aware about my rights as a passenger, but now I had a situation where I was compensated," Sahiti told SETimes. 
Berisha said that travellers are encouraged to read their rights and learn how to use the forms posted there to complain. 
Have you ever been compensated for a flight delay? Share your experience in the comments below. 
