17/05/2013
By Menekse Tokyay and Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Istanbul and Sofia -- 17/05/13
Hundreds of Bulgarian truck drivers and haulers blocked the Kapitan Andreevo crossing point on their country's border with Turkey for the second time in a week on Thursday (May 16th), causing long lines at a major border crossing that brings goods from the Middle East and Turkey to European markets. 
The Bulgarian truckers are drawing attention to what they see as Ankara's attempts to push them out of the Turkish market of transporting goods. 
Bulgarian companies used to be heavily involved in the goods traffic to and from Azerbaijan, Iran, Iraq, Jordan and Syria. 
"Today, about 95 percent of that part of the market is already in the hands of Turkish service providers," Vasil Pironkov, the head of the Comexmasch company in the southern Bulgaria town of Asenovgrad and deputy chairman of the National Association of Bus Transport in Bulgaria, told SETimes. 
"They pushed us out of the Arab market, now they want to displace us from the Turkish goods traffic to Europe as well," he said. 
According to Turkish authorities, the reason for the May 9th and May 16th protests is associated with problems that the truck drivers face when acquiring "dozvola," a transport permit document, in Bulgaria. 
Without the permits they cannot transport products into Turkey and their own countries. 
Muslum Yalcin, regional director of Thrace Customs and Trade Directorate, told SETimes that he has been involved in direct talks with Bulgarian authorities to resolve the issue. 
"Bulgarian transporters wanted to express the problems they have been facing at the customs because of the lack of a valid transit permit. We noted their concerns and requests and after drafting a report, we forwarded those requests, like the increase of quotas and the number of transit permits, to the Turkish Ministry of Transport. The quota they were entitled to transport had come to an end because of over-use, and they preferred their voice to be heard by such a method, which is quite unpleasant," Yalcin said. 
"How can we permit trucks carrying loads and passing by our customs without any valid document? Due to such an administrative deficiency on their part, we could not complete their operations. Although some in Bulgaria may see this as a red tape, it is an internationally accepted obligation for us to check officially all entries from the checkpoints and prevent any unjustified benefit during the transport operations to the third countries," he added. 
On May 14th, Bulgarian interim Minister of Transport, Information Technologies and Communications Kristiyan Krastev met with truckers and transportation representatives to review their main problems at the Bulgarian-Turkish border. 
The cargo and passenger traffic between the two countries is regulated by quotas, since Bulgaria unilaterally terminated a bilateral agreement on road transport of passengers and cargo with Turkey in 2007. In 2010, a new agreement was concluded after joint commission meetings between the two countries. 
Representatives of hauling companies, however, complain of discriminatory measures being employed by the Turkish customs officials against them. One specific action they cited was the imposition of restrictions for their re-entry into Turkey after they have delivered a cargo to its European destination. 
For instance, a Bulgarian company was hired to transport Turkish cargo to Germany and then return to Turkey to deliver another cargo. While the assignment can be completed in five days, the truck driver is given permission to re-enter Turkey no earlier than eight days after the start of the trip, representatives of Bulgarian transport companies said. 
"So, we go to Munich [Germany] and then we return with the cargo we're supposed to deliver in Turkey, but they won't let us into the country," Pironkov said. "They say, 'You'll wait three days for the deadline we have set to expire and then you can enter' Turkey. Sometimes they'll say, 'OK, you can go, but you must pay 100 or 150 euros per truck first'." 
The Bulgarian hauling companies have also called for the removal or easing of restrictions on the amount of fuel trucks can carrying upon their entry into Turkey. The limit is set at 450 litres or 560 litres, depending on the type of the vehicle, Pironkov said, explaining that that amount was enough to reach Istanbul, or Aegean city of Izmir at best. The problem is that the price of petrol in Turkey, the most expensive in the world, is much higher than in Bulgaria. 
The Bulgarian companies say they have obtained a copy of a recent Turkish internal directive instructing the country's customs authority to carry out stricter checks of foreign cargo trucks, especially from Bulgaria. 
Krassimir Lalov, deputy chairman of the National Association of the Bulgarian Road Carriers, said the organisation did not join the rally at Kapitan Andreevo, because "you can't stage a protest at the border" three days before the parliamentary elections in Bulgaria. 
"There are problems between the two countries [in this field], but we believe they should be resolved through dialogue. Blocking the border is hardly the best way to deal with them, before some shuttle diplomacy," he told SETimes. 
The bigger problem, according to Lalov, was in Bulgaria's failure in recent years to formulate its national priorities and a clear strategy. 
Following talks with the protesters on May 9th, Bulgaria's Deputy Transport Minister Albena Lazarova said that the ministry requested an urgent meeting with Turkish officials to resolve the issue. Until that happens, "this groundless repression" of Bulgarian haulers by the customs officials on the Turkish border will be suspended, she was quoted as saying. 
According to Fatih Sener from the Istanbul-based International Transportation Association, the problem can be resolved by a joint meeting between the transport companies and the associations of the two countries gathering around a table, provided that both parties take this issue seriously, fairly and with good faith. 
Sener said the practices on the Turkish side is in reciprocity for policies implemented by the Bulgarian authorities, such as the control of transport documents, tachographs, high fines, and establishment of special units for the control of transportation documents. 
"The Turkish side is doing what the Bulgarian counterparts implemented. This is not discrimination against a specific country, but rather as a new practice including all vehicles from all countries including Turkish ones in order to prevent unfair competition," Sener said. 
"We have resolved similar problems with the Association of the Bulgarian Enterprises for International Road Transport and the Roads in the past. We are two neighbours that are extremely vulnerable to the reciprocal practices [to restrict trucking]," Sener told SETimes. 
A similar protest was held in June 2008, that time by hundreds of Turkish truck carriers protesting before the Bulgarian Embassy in Ankara against transit fees that the Bulgarian authorities were introducing. 
Turkish transport companies still complain about the additional fees, careless unloading and difficulties encountered by Turkish truckers, especially carrying textile and fresh fruit to be sold in European markets during transit passage through Bulgaria. In May, hundreds of Turkish transportation trucks were fined 2,600 euros each for simple errors, Turkish sector representatives said. 
Should Turkish and Bulgarian customs officials make the transportation of goods across the border easier for both sides? Share your thoughts in the comments section below. 
