16/10/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 16/10/09
A symbolically important football match between Turkey and Armenia on Wednesday (October 14th) boosted hopes for normalising relations between the two neighbours. 
Armenian President Serzh Sargsyan paid his first visit to Turkey, at the invitation of Turkish counterpart Abdullah Gul, and the two watched the match side-by-side, chatting throughout the game. 
Sargsyan's visit came four days after the signing in Zurich of historic agreements between the two countries, aimed at establishing diplomatic relations and opening the border. The two protocols, signed by Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu and Armenian counterpart Edward Nalbandian, mark the first bilateral agreement between the neighbours in about 88 years. 
The "football" meeting between Sargsyan and Gul has been interpreted by local media as signs of further warming between the countries and growing confidence in the process. 
Tension was high before and during the match in Bursa, a former capital of the Ottoman Empire. Officials feared protests or violence by ultra-nationalists or hooligans. Heavy security prevented any major problems before or after the match, which Turkey won 2-0. 
The rapprochement between the two countries has been met with opposition from nationalists in both countries -- particularly Armenia. Sargsyan was under strong pressure not to visit Turkey and initiate the process of normalisation. 
In Turkey, the government is under strong criticism by the opposition for selling out strong ally Azerbaijan. The Karabakh region of Azerbaijan has been under Armenian occupation since 1993. In response, Turkey closed its border with Armenia as a sign of support for Azerbaijan. 
Ankara had long insisted that after Armenia moves towards a settlement in Karabakh, it would open the border with its northeast neighbour. 
But the protocols signed in Zurich on October 10th foresee the establishment of diplomatic relations and opening the border without any direct reference to Karabakh. Armenia insists that its ties with Turkey are not linked to its conflict with Azerbaijan. 
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan hinted this week that there will still be progress towards a solution in Karabakh to ensure that the signed agreements with Armenia are realised. 
The agreements must be ratified by the both countries' parliaments before taking effect. 
