28/11/2011
By Maria Paravantes for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 28/11/11
Claiming the health ministry owes 3.8m euros, power workers shut down electricity on November 16th. The ministry denies it owes that amount, and disgruntled citizens and unionists took over utility offices around Greece on Thursday (November 24th). As riot police tried to disperse the crowds, dozens of mayors protested the government's September decision to impose an emergency property tax through electricity bills. 
"It is our institutional and moral duty to stand by our residents," Marathon Mayor Iordanis Louizos told SETimes. 
"We have called on Public Power Corporation (DEI) to refrain from taking any unconventional, arbitrary and abusive action of cutting the power supply, especially of those who are in no position to pay the special property tax," Louizos said. 
"Marathon will support its residents, and we ask DEI authorities to refrain from any such action until a final decision is reached by the higher court," he added. 
Described as "unconstitutional" and "anti-social", the tax -- which is calculated per square metre, use and location of property -- has triggered reactions on all fronts. DEI trade union (GENOP) refuses to pull the plug on homes of the poor, unemployed, disabled and cash-strapped. And Attica mayors have come out publicly against the decision.
The legitimacy of the levy is scheduled for a decision on Friday. Louizos is one of the many Attica mayors who have teamed up with other counterparts against the decision. He is optimistic and thinks the result of their actions will benefit all. 
"We are in touch with all local government authorities and are optimistic that with co-ordinated efforts we will have a positive outcome," Louizos said. 
On November 21st, however, the president and general manager of DEI, Arthuros Zervos, did not show up at a scheduled meeting with a number of Attica mayors to discuss the issue, claiming he would meet with mayors only under the umbrella of the Central Union of Municipalities and Communities of Greece. 
The mayors of over 15 townships said they would pursue further action. 
In the meantime, outside Nea Ionia city hall stands a banner reading "Don't have --can't pay". Nea Ionia is a primarily working class municipality and was the first to react to the decision. On the city's web page, instructions are given on how to pay the electricity without the attached property tax. 
According to DEI unionist claims, the state owes the public power corporation 141m euros in unpaid electricity bills. 
"We will not cut electricity in the homes of the poor, the unemployed, the pensioner, the low-wage earner," GENOP President Nikos Fotopoulos has repeatedly said. 
In a recent development last week, the finance ministry announced it had proceeded with modifications to the levy excluding certain social groups from paying, including low-income, unemployed and people with special needs. 
Analysts warn that a new problem will arise -- proving that you belong to one of these "special" groups. This move also comes after a First Instance Court decision to exempt a Kalamata couple from paying the levy with a court order banning DEI from cutting off the power. 
"This is totally ridiculous," pensioner Ioannis Vrettos told SETimes as he stood in the long line outside a DEI office in Ano Patissia, central Athens. 
"First they cut our pension, then they add this tax and they expect people to be able to pay in two months?" 
"They're irresponsible," added a man down the line. "They added the tax but have made so many errors on our bills, charging us more than we ought to pay." 
While Greeks are scrambling to find cash to pay accumulating bills and new taxes, banks began to issue tax loans branded "tax accommodation programmes". 
When contacted by SETimes, bank officials issuing such loans refused to go on record. 
Emporiki and Piraeus were the first to launch the new loans in May, with several more banking institutions following suit, allowing up to a ten-year payback. 
Loans vary from paying off illegal home or unlawful home modifications fines to public dues. 
"They're filling in a hole by creating a new hole," economist O Constantinidi, a former bank employ told SETimes. 
"Loans are a vicious cycle, especially in today's insecure financial environment. This can only result for the consumer inevitably to fall deeper in debt." 
