22/11/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb –22/11/07
With general elections set for Sunday (November 25th), Croatia has been in the grip of a close, bitterly fought campaign. The two main rivals -- the incumbent Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) and the left-wing Social Democrats (SDP) -- are battling for every vote. 
 Even the death of Prime Minister Ivo Sanader's father provided only a brief break in campaigning. The HDZ leader took only a few days off to grieve. 
Overall, the tone has been remarkably negative, with Sanader and SDP rival Zoran Milanovic showing no mercy towards each other. Milanovic calls Sanader "a coward and a manipulator", accusing him of ducking opportunities for a public debate. Sanader, meanwhile, says Milanovic "is not a leader and cannot take the responsibility of leading the country". 
Despite the mudslinging, the two parties share the same values and priorities where Croatia's future is concerned. The HDZ and SDP both want Croatia to join NATO and the EU as soon as possible. Both are committed to minority rights, promoting democracy and rule of law, judicial reform and the fight against corruption. 
 The key points of difference are economic. HDZ promotes free-market liberalism, saying this is the key to spurring growth. The SDP wants a greater degree of state interventionism, arguing that standards of living must be protected. 
The campaign has been one of the most expensive in Croatia's history. The ruling party spent 2m euros just in the first two weeks of campaigning, while the SDP spent around half that amount, according to Transparency International Croatia. 
Only four other parties are expected to cross the 5% threshold. There are ten electoral units in Croatia and one electoral unit for the diaspora. Ethnic Croats in neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) have the right, under Croatia's constitution, to vote in Croatian elections. In a race this tight, they could tip the balance. The BiH capital has been blanketed with posters of Sanader, who is thought to enjoy a strong advantage among the Bosnian Croat constituency. 
The first unofficial results are expected Sunday evening, as soon as the polls close. 
