15/01/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 15/01/07 
Albanian President Alfred Moisiu confirmed on Sunday (January 14th) that local elections would take place February 18th. He made the announcement one day after 12 ruling and opposition parties reached a deal that averted a political crisis in the country. 
Claiming the government had issued a number of false birth certificates in recent months, the opposition Socialists had been threatening to boycott the poll unless electoral reforms were put in place and new ID requirements established. The government repeatedly has denied the accusations, insisting it was trying to organise a vote according to democratic standards. 
Under the new accord, hashed out during protracted talks supervised by Moisiu, voters will have to produce two identity documents at polling stations. Fraudulent voters will face between three and seven years in jail. 
The deal followed a joint appeal Thursday by Prime Minister Sali Berisha and his long time opponent, former Prime Minister Fatos Nano. The two rivals have dominated the political scene over the last 16 years. 
In a surprise appearance in front of the media, Berisha and Nano urged the political parties to overcome the electoral crisis, saying it posed a danger to the country. The coming elections are decisive for Albania's European future, they said. 
In a special session Saturday, Parliament changed several parts of the constitution and the electoral code, seeking to resolve all fraud-related concerns and to pave the way to a fair and democratic election process. 
In the wake of the deal, parties are registering their candidates with the central and local election commissions. State and political structures in Tirana are working overtime to catch up. 
"We have to finish all the process by January 25th, which means we have to put in extra effort," said Central Electoral Commission chairman Clirim Gjata. "And we have to provide the definitive voter's list by February 7th." 
The local elections are regarded as a test of political maturity in Albania, which aspires to eventual membership in the EU and NATO. 
Free and fair elections are essential for progress on the road to EU accession, Brussels has warned. 
