05/03/2007
Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 05/03/07
Judges at the court of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) found sufficient evidence that Gojko Janković, Serb leader of a paramilitary unit and police during the 1990's conflict in BiH, participated in a systematic attack against the non-Serb civilian population in the Foča region between April 1992 and November1993. 
Specifically, prosecutors said that in July 1992, Janković commanded his paramilitary formation during an attack on Bosniak civilians hiding in the Kremnik Hill forest. Ten men were killed, three during the attack and seven later, after interrogations. The women and children were arrested. 
The trial was high profile, as it included testimony from several protected witnesses who described being raped by Jankovic. He was convicted of raping at least five women in six months. 
Among 196 protected witnesses, one woman testified that she was treated as Janković's "property", and that no other soldier was allowed to touch her. A minor at the time, she was taken from a house in Aladža where other prisoners were kept and held separately until January 1993. Jankovic was also convicted of raping female detainees in the Partizan sports hall in Foča. 
He was acquitted, however, of two counts -- taking part in the rape of a protected witness identified only as "E" and of the murder of a civilian named Ređo Pekaz in 1992. Prosecutors say he was arrested in the village of Trošanj and murdered by Janković and his men. 
Presiding Judge Zorica Gogala said the panel was satisfied with the amount of evidence presented and that "the only fact in favor of the defendant was that he is a family man". 
After the verdict was announced, Janković's wife, Milica, told reporters that she was "disgusted" with it, adding the court "believed scum, rather than honest people". 
"Although this is the most severe sentence rendered so far by BiH War Crimes Chamber, I cannot say that justice has been fully served. A life sentence would have been more appropriate." Victims' of War Associations President Bakira Hasečić said. 
At the BiH court last week, trials against defendants Krešo Lučić and Zdravko Mihaljević began for crimes against humanity. Both pleaded not guilty. 
The indictment charges Lučić, a Croatian military police commander, with detention and torture of Bosniak civilians during attacks on Kreševo. 
Mihaljević, a member of the Croatian Defence Council special task unit, is charged with persecution, torture and murder of Bosniak civilians in the Kiseljak municipality. 
