23/08/2005
(Office of the High Representative, AP, FENA - 22/08/05)
High Representative in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Paddy Ashdown said on Monday (22 August) that he would start transferring his sweeping powers to local and EU institutions, as the Balkan country progresses along its EU integration path. 
As part of this transition, the Office of the High Representative (OHR) will undergo a process of restructuring that will eventually lead to its replacement by the Office of the EU Special Representative (EUSR). 
The move reflects the recommendations made by the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) during a June meeting in Sarajevo and "the continuing progress that BiH is making from peace stabilisation towards European integration," an OHR statement explained. 
The OHR was established as a temporary mission in December 1995, tasked with the implementation of the civilian aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement that ended the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH. The high representative, the international community's top envoy in the country, has overarching powers that allow him to impose decisions and laws. He can dismiss even the highest-ranking officials, if he thinks they are obstructing the peace process in BiH. 
"I'm pleased that we are now at a stage where we can start planning for the handover of powers to the BiH institutions and to the permanent international community institutions such as the EUSR and the European Commission, as has happened in other recovering states," the OHR statement quoted Ashdown as saying. 
BiH is now standing on the doorstep of talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU and participation in NATO's Partnership for Peace programme, the OHR said. 
Just how quickly steps are implemented during the transition process will be tied to actual progress in BiH and will depend on the ability of institutions to push through reforms, it added. 
Ashdown plans meetings with staff at all of the OHR principal offices to explain the transition plan. Apart from its main office in Sarajevo, the OHR also has field offices in Banja Luka, Mostar, Brcko, Tuzla and seven other cities in BiH. 
The OHR's staff has been downsized by more than a third from its peak in 2002, Ashdown's office noted, pointing also to a reduction of more than 4m euros in its budget for 2005, which stands at less than 17m euros. The proposal for 2006 would see OHR's budget further reduced to less than 14m euros. 
The end point of the transition, Ashdown's office concluded, "will be an important milestone in BiH's development -- the point at which BiH takes its own destiny fully into its own hands, and moves forward decisively towards greater integration in the EU". 
