27/12/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/12/11
Robert Cooper has been tasked with facilitating the ongoing dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina on a range of issues. In an interview with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku, he assesses the results of the talks and the way forward. 
SETimes: How will Kosovo and Serbia be rewarded for maintaining the technical dialogue? 
Robert Cooper: The dialogue is not about rewards. The dialogue is about improving the life of ordinary people, solving practical issues and moving closer to the EU. Everything agreed in the dialogue will, in the long run, be of benefit to both sides. Virtue is its own reward. 
 SETimes: What are the main issues left to agree on, and is it possible that the technical dialogue could transform into a political dialogue? If so, who would facilitate it? 
 Cooper: I do not understand this distinction between technical and political. Was the agreement on the Coal and Steel Community, the forerunner of the EU, technical or political? Everything we discuss is technical -- customs stamps, cadastre, telecoms, regional co-operation are all subjects for experts -- but most of the decisions are considered at the level of president or prime minister. Doesn't that suggest there is a political angle too? 
I hope that the dialogue can continue to produce results. We still want to find solutions on regional co-operation, telecommunications and energy. We have also touched upon religious and cultural heritage and airspace as potential topics. 
 SETimes: Is the Integrated Borders Management (IBM) agreement the way to solve the issue concerning the northern borders? And could northern Kosovo and the issue of the northern gates become part of the dialogue despite Pristina's firm objections? 
 Cooper: The IBM agreement reached on December 2nd should really be seen in the context of the need for the parties to gradually harmonise their legislation with the EU acquis. The underlying idea is to make border controls faster and more effective. This agreement enables different services from both sides to work together in a single space. It happens already in a number of places, between Albania and Montenegro, or Greece and Bulgaria. You can see something like it here in Brussels at the South Station, where Belgian and UK immigration and customs officials work together in a common area for the benefit of the Eurostar travellers. In our case, they will do this jointly at crossing points and together with EULEX in accordance with its mandate. We will work together with all communities in implementing this agreement. 
There is no instant solution to the problems in the north. But the current situation is bad for everybody, and it's unsustainable. Jointly managed crossings may be part of a solution. At the least they will set a visible example of intelligent collaboration. 
 SETimes: How do you see the end of this dialogue? How implementable are the agreements that have been reached so far? 
 Cooper: It won't go on forever. There are a limited number of subjects to cover and we have made decent progress. It is no use agreeing on things unless they are implemented. In some cases that will be a long process. Civil registry has only just started and will take a long time to complete. Free Movement of people and vehicles will begin on December 26th and will continue until better arrangements are found. And as mentioned earlier there are still a number of issues to be resolved. When these are done we should think about other ways of improving co-operation and resolving problems. 
