24/12/2008
By Valentin Nesovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 24/12/08
"Kolede lede, padnalo grede ... " There is no Macedonian who has not been awakened with this song, sung in the early morning hours of January 6th. That date, known as Badnik, is the eve of Orthodox Christmas. 
Winter celebrations in Macedonia start well before that, however. During December groups of people travel to the mountains to pick oak branches to decorate their homes. The branches will be set aflame on Badnik. Meanwhile, elderly women plant wheat in pots. The green shoots symbolise life, fertility and prosperity. 
In the last week of December, villagers and townspeople select a "Godfather" -- a respected person whose task will be to look after the community's well-being during the coming year. 
On Christmas Eve, the entire family gathers at the table. Only vegetarian food is served, as this is the last day of a 40-day fast observed by the faithful. The head of the family breaks open a large, round loaf of bread, giving a piece to each family member. One piece contains a lucky coin. Everyone waits anxiously to see who will get it. 
Although Macedonians celebrate Christmas only once, following the old Julian calendar, when it comes to New Year's, they are more liberal. Both the Gregorian and Julian New Years are observed. For decades, revelers have gathered in front of the famous Idadija Tavern in Debar Maalo, a Skopje district, to sing songs and perform folk dances on January 1st. 
On January 5th, it's time to gather logs for a huge bonfire; people then gather to sing Kolede songs announcing Christ's birth and to drink warmed rakija. Children go from door to door singing and usually receive coins, apples, pears and candies in return. 
Another festivity follows on January 14th, when masked balls occur in many places. Even at home, people don masks. The purpose: to scare away evil demons. 
Vodici, or Epiphany, is January 19th. A custom on this day is to throw a cross into a river or lake; hardy celebrants will then jump in and try to retrieve it. With this ritual, the cycle of winter festivities comes to an end, and it is time to await spring. 
