12/07/2005
(AP, Reuters, FT, Xinhua, EurActiv - 11/07/05; AP - 09/07/05; OSCE - 04/07/05) 
Albania's Central Electoral Commission (CEC) issued on Sunday (10 July) preliminary official results of the country's 3 July parliamentary elections, confirming former President Sali Berisha's Democratic Party (DP) as the winner. 
Although the Democrats are said to have won a clear majority in the country's 140-seat legislature, they are unlikely to be able to form a government before the end of this month. Refusing to concede defeat, the incumbent ruling Socialist Party (SP) of Prime Minister Fatos is planning to contest the results, citing violations of electoral law in 30 constituencies. 
A count of the votes cast in 97 out of the 100 single-seat constituencies, showed the DP winning 55 parliamentary seats. The SP trailed with 40 seats, while an independent candidate and former Prime Minister Ilir Meta's Party of Socialist Movement took the other two seats. 
Under Albanian law, the remaining 40 seats are distributed through proportional allocations depending on the percentage of the vote parties surpassing the 2.5 per cent threshold have won nationwide. The additional seats the DP and its allies are said to have won on the basis of this system give them an at least 73-seat majority, allowing them to form a government. The SP and its allies would take a total of 64 seats. 
The election was seen as a key test of the country's ability to hold free and fair elections in line with international democratic standards. All five elections held in Albania since the fall of communism in 1990 have been tarnished by voting irregularities, violence and intimidation. 
The latest poll "complied only partially with international commitments and standards for democratic elections," said the OSCE, which sent more than 400 international election observers to monitor the voting. EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana urged authorities to conduct an official investigation into irregularities. 
The CEC said it must investigate 230 complaints from parties and independent candidates before announcing the final results. Berisha could eventually end up with fewer parliamentary seats, which would dilute his strength in the 140-member assembly. 
"I will accept any result showing defeat or victory for the Socialists only when it is certified by the electoral courts and the Central Election Commission," Nano said Sunday. His government will continue to run the country until the certification of the poll's outcome. 
