24/04/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori and Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 24/04/13
Experts believe that EU funding for regional programmes should be focused on projects that foster co-operation between Kosovo and Serbia, as an integrated part of the normalisation of relations between two sides. 
The European Commission has finalised a series of measures to promote regional co-operation between the Western Balkan countries totalling 272.75 million euros. 
Berat Maqastena, a researcher at the Pristina Initiative for Regional Co-operation and Dialogue, told SETimes that EU projects that increased co-operation between civil society and universities and institutions in Kosovo and Serbia would contribute to the normalisation of relations between Pristina and Belgrade. 
"The general approach on regional co-operation should focus on the Pristina-Belgrade relations, because this is the most challenging part in the regional for the moment," Maqastena said. 
"There is not yet a cross-border co-operation programme between Kosovo and Serbia. The European Commission pays particular attention to make the regional co-operation process all-inclusive," Anca Paduraru, a press officer at the European Commission, told SETimes. 
To improve regional co-operation, it is crucial to launch "component programmes" related to cross-border and transnational co-operation, Ivan Knezevic, deputy general secretary of the European Movement of Serbia, told SETimes. 
"The component programmes are focused on co-operation between all subjects: municipalities, NGOs, chamber of commerce, universities, museums, schools …," Knezevic said. 
The EU supports programmes in several sectors, such as public administration reform, justice and home affairs, private sector development, transport and energy infrastructure, environment and climate change, sector social development and other activities. 
"The assistance under the multi-beneficiary programmes complements individual national programmes by focusing on regional aspects and helping countries learn from each other's experience," Stojan Pelko, a spokesman at the EU liaison office in Pristina, told SETimes. 
"Because of the huge financial contribution by the EU, all the countries have benefited and have been motivated to leave the past behind and look forward to European Union membership," said Maqastena. 
What kind of programmes should the EU fund to support regional co-operation in the region? Please share your thoughts in the comments. 
