20/10/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 20/10/09
Macedonia and Kosovo officially established diplomatic relations at the ambassadorial level late Saturday (October 17th). The move clears the way for signing and ratifying agreements that had been held up due to the lack of formal ties. 
In a document signed by their respective foreign ministers, the two countries pledged to strengthen friendly relations based on mutual respect for their national sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity. 
The agreement brought praise from the international community, but fierce criticism from Serbia, which staunchly opposes its former province's claim to independence. 
The EU presidency issued a statement welcoming "recent developments regarding good neighbourly relations between Skopje and Pristina". Albania, meanwhile, hailed the establishment of ties as an important contribution to long-term regional stability. Albanian Foreign Minister Ilir Meta phoned his Kosovo counterpart, Skender Hyseni, to congratulate him. 
By contrast, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic blasted Skopje's decision to extend recognition, saying it undermined Macedonia's relations with Serbia at a time when they had just begun to improve. 
The decision will have consequences, Jeremic warned. 
Recognition came just hours after Kosovo's parliament ratified a border demarcation agreement with Macedonia. Jeremic was unhappy about this deal as well, saying Macedonia should have consulted with Belgrade first. The Macedonian parliament ratified the agreement earlier. 
The agreement aims to a resolve a long-standing dispute over where precisely to draw the 260km boundary line. Macedonia is now set to gain 160m at Lukovo Pole on Shar Mountain, while Kosovo gets 155m at Debalde, near the strategic point of Kodra Fura. 
Emotions were high over the issue, and it took two attempts to win ratification in Kosovo's 120-seat parliament. The first time, the necessary two-thirds majority was not achieved. Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi then pushed for a united front among the leaders of all Kosovo's political parties and was able to drum up the 81 required votes. 
Kosovo's government attaches special significance to the border agreement. In a statement, the government said the deal "reconfirms the international standing of the Republic of Kosovo" and will strengthen its case at the International Court of Justice, where Serbia has filed suit. 
