03/09/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 03/09/07
The latest round of talks on Kosovo, held Thursday (August 30th) in Vienna, have ended without any major progress towards finding a solution. However, the two sides did agree that partitioning the province is not an option. 
The Kosovo Albanian delegation remained firm in its demand for full independence from Serbia, while the Serbian representatives again offered broad autonomy as an alternative. 
 "We believe that they understand our position," Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku said as he returned to Pristina. "We shouldn't negotiate about independence, because this is non-negotiable." 
The daily Vecernje Novosti, however, said international mediators had listened "with great attention" to Belgrade's autonomy proposal. According to the daily, the EU-Russia-US "troika" received a more detailed explanation of the proposal, outlining such issues as border control and the arrangement of military forces in the province. 
 Belgrade and Pristina are also at odds over when the talks should end, and whether these should be the last set of talks. The Kosovo Albanian side is adamant that December 10th should be the end of the process, with no further delays after that. 
 By contrast, Serbian chief negotiator Slobodan Samardzic says it is unrealistic to expect a status settlement by then. Western countries will soon realise the deadline cannot be met, he said, and the discussions will continue. 
Similar remarks came from Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic. Speaking to the daily Vecernje Novosti, he stressed that Serbia and Russia both favour an open-ended process. 
 Even as Serbia presses it case, however, officials there have acknowledged that the Kosovo Albanians may unilaterally declare independence if the current negotiations do not yield agreement. 
At an open government session, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica said Serbia, with Russia's help, had managed to "remove the danger" of the UN Security Council adopting a resolution based on former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan for supervised independence. However, he added, there was still the danger that "the Albanian separatists" would make their own declaration by the end of the year. 
Should that happen, Kostunica said, Serbia would take measures against any country that recognised Pristina's move. 
 "If someone damages you, you must react by causing certain damage as well. That way you preserve your own integrity and the dignity of the state and every citizen," the prime minister said, declining to reveal what specific action Serbia might take. 
On Sunday, however, his Democratic Party of Serbia (DPS) issued a statement suggesting that Serbia could abandon its effort to join NATO. 
"Certainly, one of the possible responses that needs to be discussed is a decision by the Serbian parliament that Serbia cannot become a member of NATO," the DPS said. 
Serbia is currently a member of the Alliance's Partnership for Peace programme. While entry into NATO is not a prerequisite for joining the EU, the process of integration has historically followed that sequence. 
Southeast European Times correspondent Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi contributed to this report.
