21/03/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeat European Times in Sarajevo -- 21/03/13
Co-operation between municipalities in the border areas of the Balkan countries is essential for promoting economic prosperity and sustainable development, experts and officials said. 
The heads of 17 municipalities from Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia located in the area of the Drina and Sava rivers recently signed a Memorandum of Co-operation to undertake joint activities, including projects focusing on agriculture, tourism and ecology. 
The goal is to make the entire region functional through various projects, according to Ivica Klem, head of the Nijemci municipality in Croatia. 
"So far we have had excellent cross-border co-operation, but we expect it to become even better. Co-operation in the fields of agriculture, ecology, sustainable development and economy can improve further," Klem told SETimes. 
Klem said that neighbouring municipalities can expect full support when Croatia becomes an EU member in July. 
Milo Domlijan, a farmer from Bijeljina in BiH, said citizen interest in the border-municipalities in trade of fresh fruits, vegetables and meat is huge. 
"I talked with the city authorities and received assurances that next year the municipalities will conduct a regional 'food market' project -- something like a stock market for food, where farmers will be able to sell their products in neighbouring countries," Domlijan told SETimes. 
Domlijan said the project is important to the local economies because it will merge the smaller markets into one large one, while taxes will likely remain the same. 
Municipality representatives recognise that the economy is what will connect them in the future, and sharing experiences and efforts to strengthen it is a priority. 
"We should all forget what makes us different and try to exchange good experiences so that everyone will be better off. The focus of the border municipalities should be agriculture and rural development," Jezdimir Vucetic, deputy mayor of Loznica in Serbia, told SETimes. 
In another joint effort, a Protocol of Co-operation for Sustainable Development was signed by 14 municipalities in BiH, Serbia and Montenegro on March 7th, which will focus most activities and projects on tourism and the environment. 
Virtually all the municipalities have poor infrastructure, underdeveloped entrepreneurship and a high level of migration. Officials said it is important for the municipalities to join together when competing for projects and funds, pooling their strengths. 
"Not all the municipalities are good in all things. Therefore, co-operation for projects is important because municipalities complement each other and thus make for a [larger] quality unit. Together they can create quality projects to compete for EU funds or from other sources," Vjekoslav Stevanovic, head of the economy department at the Bratunac municipality in BiH, one of the signatories, told SETimes. 
Genc Goranci, co-ordinator of the Nansen Dialogue Centre in Sarajevo -- an NGO that promotes nationwide reconciliation and tolerance in the Balkans, said it is essential that co-operation start at the local level. 
"The people who live in the peripheral municipalities are focused on the problems in their communities, while the power centres in the major cities view them as a voting [blocs]," Goranci told SETimes. 
"[The centre] has undertaken numerous projects which show that people of different faiths and nations do not have any problem when it comes to co-operation which will make their life better," Goranci added. 
