16/03/2006
(Reuters, AP, RFE/RL, FENA, HINA, ICTY - 15/03/06)
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) on Wednesday (15 March) convicted two former Bosnian Muslim commanders, charged with war crimes committed during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
The three-member trial chamber, presided over by Judge Jean-Claude Antonetti, sentenced retired General Enver Hadzihasanovic to five years in prison and former brigade commander Amir Kubura to two and a half years. The two former members of the Army of BiH (ABiH) are among the highest-ranking Bosnian Muslims to stand trial at The Hague-based tribunal. 
An amended joint indictment of September 2003 charged them with seven counts of violations of the laws or customs of war for the killings or cruel treatment of scores of Bosnian Croats and Serbs by troops under their command, as well as for the wanton destruction of cities, towns and villages, plundering of property, and destruction of religious sites. All crimes UN prosecutors detailed in the document were committed between January 1993 and 16 March 1994. 
Hadzihasanovic was commander of the ABiH's 3rd Corps until 1 November 1993, when he was promoted to Chief of the Supreme Command Staff of the ABiH. Kubura became the ABiH 3rd Corps 7th Muslim Mountain Brigade Chief of Staff on 1 January 1993 and in July that year was appointed commander of that brigade. 
The two officers "knew or had reason to know that ABiH forces under their command and effective control were about to commit such acts or had done so… and they failed to take the necessary and reasonable measures to prevent such acts or to punish the perpetrators thereof," the indictment said. Prosecutors were seeking a 20-year prison sentence for Hadzihasanovic, 55, and a 10-year one for Kubura, 42. 
On Wednesday, ICTY judges found the two guilty of failing to prevent some of the atrocities or to punish troops under their command who committed them, including foreign Islamic Mujahedeen fighters. 
Hadzihasanovic, who exercised effective control over a Mujahedeen detachment, failed to prevent its members from severely beating and psychologically abusing five Bosnian Croat and Serb civilians in the municipality of Travnik, and from killing a Bosnian Serb in October 1993 in the Orasac camp, the court found. It also found him guilty of failing to prevent or punish members of his forces who cruelly treated civilians and prisoners of war in five detention facilities in 1993. 
The trial chamber convicted Kubura for failing to take necessary and reasonable measures to punish members of his forces who plundered private or public property in the villages of Susanj, Ovnak, Brajkovici and Grahovcici in June 1993 and in the village of Vares in November 1993. 
However, the former Bosnian Muslim commanders were acquitted of the most serious charges in the indictment, including the massacre of 23 Bosnian Croat men and one young woman near the village of Maline in the Travnik municipality on 8 June 1993. 
Prosecutors, the trial chamber said, failed to prove that the Mujahedeen forces had officially joined the ABiH and that they were de jure subordinated to Hadzihasanovic and Kubura before 13 August 1993, when the "El Mujahed" unit was established and attached to the 3rd Corps. 
It was the first ICTY judgement dealing with the presence of foreign Muslim or Mujahedeen fighters involved in the 1992-1995 BiH conflict. 
The 828 days Hadzihasanovic and Kubura have already spent in detention will be credited towards their sentences. 
