15/09/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 15/09/06
The UN Security Council met on Wednesday (13 September) to discuss Kosovo. Joachim Ruecker, head of the UN mission in the province, told the Council that resolving the status issue is crucial to further stabilisation and that any postponement would be counterproductive. 
"Kosovo needs to be rid of this uncertainty, and to move on," he said. Although tensions and difficulties are bound to arise, dangers arising from delays in the process are greater, he added. 
"Delay will not bring reconciliation. Delay will not lead to economic recovery. Delay will only prolong the tensions existing in Kosovo society, which will feed frustration and make the new start, when it does come, even harder to get right," Ruecker said. 
He criticised the Serb boycott of Kosovo's provisional institutions, and he took issue with what he said was a distorted picture of the situation facing the Kosovo Serb community. 
"Frequent attempts to portray Kosovo as a place where non-Albanians, in particular the Kosovo Serbs, are under constant attack and daily victims of ethnic crimes are completely unjustified. They do not reflect the reality on the ground," he said. 
Although the Serb community does face difficulties, isolation is not the answer, Ruecker said. He urged Belgrade to give a clear signal to the Kosovo Serbs that their future is in Kosovo and that they should find ways to co-operate with the elected Kosovo authorities. 
In her address to the Council, however, Serbian envoy Sanda Raskovic-Ivic painted a sharply contrasting picture, saying Serbs in Kosovo can be killed simply for speaking their own language. She said there have been dozens of attacks against ethnic Serbs and warned that it would be unwise to go too fast on negotiations. 
"Impatience and haste cannot contribute to a sustainable solution to the issue of Kosovo ... or to peace and stability in the region”, Raskovic-Ivic told the Council. 
The prime minister of Kosovo, Agim Ceku, accompanied Ruecker to the Security Council meeting, but did not have the right to speak. He did, however, send a letter to the Council, outlining three main points. 
Firstly, Ceku said, he and his government condemn all violence directed at or by ethnic groups in Kosovo. He also pledged his commitment to a multiethnic future for Kosovo, and called for the co-operation of all ethnic communities. 
"Neither I, my government nor the multi-party final status delegation wants a mono-ethnic Kosovo, now or in the future … We still await the participation of Kosovo's Serb leaders in both our everyday work to govern Kosovo and our preparations for the future after final status," he wrote. 
