08/09/2009
(BNT, Dnevnik -08/09/09; Sofia Echo, Novinite, Dnevnik, Mediapool -- 01/09/09 -04/09/09)
Former Agriculture Minister Valeri Tsvetanov was indicted on Tuesday (September 8th) with abuse of office involving 15 land swap deals -- the first member of former Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev's cabinet to face such charges. 
The prosecution also charged former head of the State Forestry Agency Stefan Yurukov, saying he deliberately concluded disadvantageous deals worth nearly 2.3m euros, according to the Sofia-based daily Dnevnik. 
Chief Prosecutor Boris Velchev announced on Sunday that former cabinet ministers would be brought up on charges, in light of an investigation. In an interview with state-run Bulgarian National Television (BNT), Sofia Chief Prosecutor Nikolay Kokinov said that about 30 important indicators of abuse of power in different ministries have been submitted to the prosecution over the past five weeks. "Investigations into those cases have been launched and we have concentrated all our efforts on them," he said. 
The centre-right Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria (GERB), which won a landslide victory in July's parliamentary elections, ran on a promise to fight high-level corruption. 
Since then, members of Prime Minister Boyko Borisov's cabinet have revealed numerous cases where huge amounts of taxpayers' money were squandered under contracts signed by their predecessors. Some of the dubious deals, especially those involving the repair or renovation of existing government buildings, or the construction of new ones, were concluded at highly inflated prices, and in violation of the public procurement rules and procedures. 
Bulgaria's parliament voted last week in a special interim committee to review the budget spending. The 12-member body, comprising two representatives of each of the parties in the assembly, has been given two months to check whether the concluded deals and appointments were in line with the law. 
GERB lawmaker Stoyan Mavrodiev said striking evidence of corruption and conflict of interest were found in almost every ministry, and that he expects the committee to come across multiple cases of abuse by the former administration. 
The state has been "totally siphoned off", The Sofia Echo said on September 1st, quoting the head of Borisov's office, Rumyana Bachvarova. 
While the Bulgarian economy has already begun to shrink and is expected to contract further later this year, Stanishev's government allegedly squandered public resources even after the election results were clear. 
 Martin Dimitrov, leader of the right-wing Union of Democratic Forces and head of parliament's economic committee, told Sofia daily Trud that between July 1st and 10th the former cabinet spent over 317m euros. 
Stanishev says that many of the allegations made by members of the new cabinet have not been checked; he also dismisses claims about big spending in the final days of his administration as "insane". 
"There was no extraordinary [unplanned] budget spending after the elections," the former prime minister told BTV on Friday. 
