29/07/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 29/07/04
Although NATO members did not accept Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) into the Partnership for Peace (PfP) during the Alliance's recent summit in Istanbul, the BiH Defence Ministry and the armed forces are pressing ahead with reforms.
BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic says he sensed "a desire within NATO to accept BiH, as well as neighbouring Serbia-Montenegro, as soon as possible. For us, it is of the utmost importance to retain the pace of activities. The SFOR vetting process for the BiH Armed Forces General Staff positions is complete and has resulted in the approval of sufficient candidates to fill all of the general officer posts. These officers showed up on their new jobs on 1 July."
NATO officials have said that BiH -- and, in particular, elements within Republika Srpska -- have not met obligations to co-operate fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Such co-operation, including the arrest and transfer of war crimes indictees, is a fundamental prerequisite for joining PfP. Nevertheless, the Alliance indicated at the summit that it looks forward to welcoming BiH into the programme once all of the conditions have been met.
"It must be emphasised that the fact that BiH has not achieved PfP at this summit does not in any way preclude the country from doing so in the future. NATO will continue to work with the relevant authorities towards achieving this goal," said UK Royal Navy Lieutenant Mark Hope, the spokesman for SFOR. "Significant progress has been made in defence reform, due to the diligent efforts of the BiH Defence Ministry. SFOR urges this process to continue further towards a single military force. In the meantime, NATO will assist BiH in this endeavour by including the state authorities in a range of PfP activities."
Earlier this month, several BiH Parliamentary deputies and defence ministry officials visited the NATO School in Oberammergau, Germany, for training in the preparation of a key PfP document, the Individual Partnership Programme (IPP). Covering a two-year period, the IPP outlines the political aims of a country joining the PfP, lists the military and other assets which will be made available for PfP purposes, and sets forth the broad objectives of co-operation in various areas, as well as specific activities to be implemented.
"The IPP is a document that is signed by every individual PfP member. The fact that NATO is already helping us to compile the IPP despite the fact that we are still not a PfP member clearly shows that the Alliance wants our country in the programme," said BiH Deputy Defence Minister Enes Beciragic, who was at Oberammergau.
