03/04/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 03/04/06
The EU will continue negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Serbia-Montenegro, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Friday (31 March). Brussels had earlier warned it might suspend the next round of talks, set to begin on Wednesday, because of Serbian authorities' failure to hand over Ratko Mladic, one of the UN tribunal's most-wanted indictees. 
After meeting with chief UN prosecutor Carla del Ponte, however, Rehn said he had decided the next round would go ahead as scheduled. The commissioner said Del Ponte informed him of "progress in Serbia-Montenegro's co-operation with the ICTY, which indicates there is a good chance of concrete results being achieved over the next few weeks". 
Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has "firmly promised that General Ratko Mladic will be found, arrested and extradited to The Hague without delay," Rehn added. 
He stressed, however, that the European Commission will continue to monitor the results achieved by the Serbian government. Later this month, he said, the EC will again assess the situation and decide whether to continue with the SAA talks. 
Serbian Vice Premier Miroljub Labus welcomed the "good news" from Brussels on Friday, saying it resulted from guarantees provided by the Kostunica administration. Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic echoed those comments, forecasting that the co-operation issue will be resolved soon. 
"I believe it will be so," Draskovic said, adding that overcoming this hurdle would pave the way for hammering out an SAA agreement by this fall. Talks on liberalising the visa regime will be launched this month, he said. 
The head of Serbia-Montenegro's national council for co-operation with the tribunal, Rasim Ljajic, said the government had anticipated a positive decision on the talks. "Del Ponte was assured that the main obligation of extraditing [Ratko] Mladic will be fulfilled," Ljajic said. 
Asked whether this meant that Mladic had been located, Ljajic said "it would not be good to give away any details until the job is done". There must be no surprises regarding the matter, he added. 
