22/08/2007
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -22/08/07
This month, Macedonia marked the sixth anniversary of the Ohrid Framework Agreement. Signed on August 13th, 2001, it put an end to several months of armed conflict in the country. It has since become an instrumental part of Macedonia's Euro-Atlantic integration process. 
The accord led to constitutional changes introducing the so-called Badinter Principle. Under it, certain types of legislation must win the approval of MPs representing minority communities in order to be adopted. A parliamentary panel known as the Committee for Relations among Communities has been established. 
Under constitutional amendments, the role of Ombudsman also has been broadened. He now oversees implementation of the principle of adequate and just representation of small ethnic communities. 
The single most important result of the agreement, however, was a new law on territorial reorganisation, which launched a two-year decentralisation process. 
 Marking the anniversary of the accord, US Ambassador Gillian Milovanovich said Macedonia has made significant progress since 2001. 
 "There is a political stability in the Republic of Macedonia. You had a fair and democratic election in 2006 and any ethnic community can take part freely in the democratic life of the country," she said. 
Professor Ljubomir Frckovski, who helped draft the Agreement, says it has largely been implemented. 
 "A law on territorial division has been adopted. It was a precondition for decentralisation that has now been implemented successfully. The implementation of the principle of adequate and just representation was also successful," Frckovski said. 
 Vlado Popovski, also involved in drafting the accord, believes about 70% of the requirements have been implemented. 
"A law on the use of flags has been adopted and large steps have been made in the part (regarding) just representation of almost every community except the Roma community. The Agreement will be completely fulfilled with the adoption of a general law on use of languages," Popovski said. 
Last year, President Branko Crvenkovski organised an official ceremony to mark the fifth anniversary. By contrast, this year only the largest ethnic Albanian party, the Democratic Union of Integration, has organised an official celebration. 
The president's office has announced plans for a roundtable discussion on the direction Macedonia has been taking since the signing of the Ohrid Agreement. The roundtable will be held on August 30th, as part of a series of debates on the future of Macedonia. 
