15/08/2006
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 15/08/06
Darko Pancev, a former player for the Macedonian football club Vardar, Red Star Belgrade (Crvena Zvezda) and Italian Inter, has finally received the Golden Boot -- 15 years after originally being selected for it. 
Pancev, 41, was to receive the trophy for his 34 goals while playing for Red Star Belgrade in 1990-1991 -- the season the club won the European championship. However, he was denied the award because of a suspicious goalscoring spree in Cyprus, sparking a huge controversy. 
Nicknamed "Cobra" for his lightning speed, Pancev's most famous moment was his winning kick in the European Championship shootout against Olympique Marseilles. That, along with his many other achievements, secured his reputation as Macedonia's most outstanding player of the last 50 years. 
On 4 August, French football legend and UEFA Vice President Michel Platini presented the award to Pancev at a ceremony in Skopje. Football Federation Vice President Jean Louis Valentin and L'Équipe editor Jean-Philipe Leclerc -- along with the FC Crvena Zvezda President Dragan Stojkovic-Piksi -- were on hand, as were former Yugoslav and Red Star players Dragan Dzajic and Dragan Stojkovic. 
In this way, an injustice has been righted, Platini said. "You will certainly agree that it is not nice that a former football player and great fan of Juventus gives such an award to a player who played for rival Inter," he joked. "Still, Darko absolutely deserves the trophy." 
For his part, Pancev said he hopes another Macedonian footballer will someday take home the Golden Boot. "It should be great motivation for all future generations of football players in the country. This award is not only for me but the whole country." 
Pancev started his career in 1982, playing for the Macedonian First League team Vardar. He signed up for Red Star in 1988, and continued his football career in Inter until 1992. He also played for Germany's Düsseldorf for one year. 
Currently, he lives in Skopje and represents Lotto, an Italian renowned sportswear brand. 
