02/06/2009
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 02/06/09
This Sunday (June 7th), Greeks will vote for their representatives at the European Parliament in Strasbourg. The number of MEPs from Greece has dropped from 24 to 22, due to a reduction in the total number of parliamentarians. MEPs are elected every five years. 
The EP elections -- the seventh for Greece since joining the Union in 1981 -- come at a critical time on the Greek political scene. The ruling New Democracy party, with only a narrow majority in the country's parliament, is suffering the impact of global economic uncertainty as well as a series of scandals. But the main opposition party, PASOK, has had trouble turning the government's woes to its advantage. 
A recent Kapa Research poll found PASOK leading with 31.7% to ND's 28.7%, within the margin of error. The gap has narrowed significantly during the course of the campaign, eroding a double-digit lead for the leftists. 
 In a bid to buff up the party's sullied image, ND has chosen veteran lawmaker Marietta Giannakou to top its slate of candidates. The former education and religion minister has a reputation as being a determined politician who is untainted by narrow political interests. 
She lost her parliamentary seat in 2007 after refusing to bow to right-wing pressure over a new high school textbook that steered clear of nationalistic themes. Later, she had her right leg amputated due to complications that followed surgery. 
"She is Marietta Giannakou the courageous. She is Marietta of exceptional character. She is our Marietta," Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis declared, announcing her candidacy. 
Polls aside, the biggest challenge for all parties will be simply persuading Greeks to go out and vote. Many see the EP elections as far less significant than domestic ones. Furthermore, June 8th is a holiday observed by the public sector. 
Nevertheless, a poll conducted by TNS Opinion late last month showed that 66% of eligible voters in Greece will vote for the MEPs. In 2004, the last EP elections, 63% of Greeks participated. 
Uncertain turnout makes it hard to predict definitively whether PASOK will come out ahead of ND. It also opens the door to smaller parties such as the Communists, the Coalition of the Left, the Ecologist Greens and the right-wing LAOS. 
