03/03/2005
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 03/03/05
Albania's Ministry of Integration has signed an agreement with the University of Tirana on an initiative to boost the country's bid for EU membership. The aim is to help bring academic expertise to the government's accession programme. 
Together, the ministry and the university will work to teach and cultivate European values. A European Dialogue and European Forum will be set up, joint studies on the process of EU integration will be undertaken, and civil servants dealing with integration-related issues will receive training. Public campaigns will seek to raise awareness about the benefits, obligations and challenges presented by EU membership. In addition, a master's programme in European Studies will be consolidated at the university. 
European Integration Minister Ermelinda Meksi and University of Tirana Chancellor Shezai Rokaj signed the document last month. 
"This is an important agreement," Meksi said. "It will transform the process of European integration from a diplomatic, political and technical operation by state officials into a study subject and a point of debate among academics and students." 
"The integration ministry will offer its contribution to the university by implementing joint programmes and assistance, while the university will prepare future professionals who can work or assist the ministry with their expertise on Albania's European integration," Rokaj said. 
Currently, several university faculties teach European integration in fields such as human sciences, history, philology and economics. According to Rokaj, however, students need more self-motivation in order to learn about European integration. These programmes will give them that chance. 
Albania faces a number of challenges on its road to joining the Union. At the last meeting between EU and Albanian officials, held in Brussels at the beginning of February, the country was urged to step up the fight against corruption and organised crime. Furthermore, the EU is placing great importance on the fair and democratic conduct of parliamentary elections scheduled for later this year. 
Keeping the public informed about these issues is a priority, officials say. The agreement with the University of Tirana is part of an overall information and communications strategy the government is implementing to ensure transparency in the integration process. 
