10/04/2011
WASHINGTON, United States -- The State Department published on Friday (April 8th) its 2010 report on global Human Rights Practices, which includes the situation in the Balkans. Some of the key problems in almost all countries in the region involve excessive force by police, poor conditions in prisons, corruption, discrimination against minority members and those with disabilities, as well as human trafficking.
In Albania, the document cites reported cases of police violence against suspects during interrogation and detention, as well as discrimination. There are similar issues in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), where harassment and intimidation of journalists and civil society members are cited. In Bulgaria, the report urges authorities to better address violence against women and children, and raise the level of education for Roma children. Croatia faces a "large backlogs of unresolved criminal and civil cases" as well as ineffective prosecution of some domestic war crimes trials.
In Cyprus and Greece, a specific issue is related to the treatment of asylum seekers. "Trafficking of women to Cyprus, particularly for sexual exploitation, continued to be a problem, and labour trafficking was also reported," the document said. Kosovo was criticised for "government interference in security forces and the judiciary; lengthy pre-trial detention and lack of judicial due process". In Macedonia, the report cited "tensions between ethnic Macedonian and ethnic Albanian populations continued to influence individuals' opportunities for education, employment, and political participation." 
Romania is faced with police violence and mistreatment of Roma detainees and human trafficking for labour, sexual exploitation and forced begging. Serbia was criticised for failing to apprehend the two remaining war crimes fugitives -- Goran Hadzic and Ratko Mladic. In the part on Turkey, the authors cited unlawful killings by security forces, problems in the judiciary, limited freedom of expression, and violence against women, including "honour killings". (State Department website, MIA, Blic, Nezavisne Novine - 09/04/11)
