04/09/2009
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 04/09/09
Chania, nestled on the island of Crete, is arguably one of the most beautiful cities in all of Greece. Known for its Venetian appearance, diverse scenery and extraordinary personalities, Chania is a must for many Greek as well as foreign tourists, particularly during the summer. The view towards the city's lighthouse is so spectacular that the locals say, "In Crete you cry twice, once when you arrive and once when you leave." The harbourside boasts several historic buildings, thriving restaurants and nightlife along the main Halidon Street, which connects the Old Town with the new. Around the harbour is greater Chania, an urban centre complete with resorts and museums, as well as plenty of entertainment, such as festivals, sporting events and concerts. Right next to Kasteli, the central part of the Old Town, is the Elefterios Venizelos square -- where there is plenty to do for tourists. It is dedicated to one of Greece's most important early 20th century statesmen. 
Many Greeks who visit Chania also spend time at the grave of Venizelos, in Kounoupidiana. It is perhaps fitting that some of the most beautiful sunsets in Crete can be observed at the tomb, where history meets culture, and the coastline meets the sea. 
To the west lies the picturesque Topanas district, with many narrow alleys and charming old buildings, some of which have been restored as hotels, restaurants, shops and bars. It is the centre of nightlife, especially in winter. 
The seaside, which extends towards Crete's westernmost village of Falassarna and Georgioupoli to the east, features some of the most luxurious beach resorts in Greece. They include everything from golf courses to water sports, cycling routes and mountaineering. Many say the ultimate challenge is crossing the Samaria Gorge, and those who have done so describe an unforgettable experience. 
The mainland gives one the impression of travelling back in time. Beyond the classic sea resort amenities, Paleochora and Sfakia offer scenery that time seems to have forgotten. 
Chania officials say the city is proud of its modern infrastructure, which serves visitors every year. The local airport at Akrotiri can handle nearly all kinds of air traffic, and the large and modern Souda Bay port deals with a flux of sea traffic. 
Chania is also famous for the tasty, yet healthy, Cretan diet -- one of the best places to enjoy this nutritious cuisine is Tamam, in the Old Town. 
