28/02/2006
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 28/02/06
Following swift government action, the bird flu in Turkey has been contained for the time being. Early this month, the last four suspected bird flu patients -- two of them confirmed to have contracted the deadly H5N1 strain -- were discharged from hospital in eastern Turkey, and the health ministry has reported no new cases in the country since January. 
A total of 21 people found to have contracted H5N1 were treated and released from the hospital. In an aggressive campaign to halt the spread of the virus -- which killed four children in January -- authorities culled nearly 2 million birds. People who were in contact with sick birds or with infected persons were given the antiflu drug Tamiflu, as were health workers caring for the ill. 
Although the current crisis seems to have ended, Turkey will continue to be threatened by H5N1. The virus appears at intervals in the country, coming by way of migratory birds. EU health officials have warned that more Turkish cases of bird flu in humans are likely in the future. 
Agriculture Minister Mehdi Eker agrees that the threat has not been eliminated. "We're maintaining our fight," he said. 
The Stockholm-based European Centre for Disease Control and Prevention praised Turkey for its transparent response to the outbreak, saying the government was quick to ask for help and follow WHO guidance. According to the centre, quick identification of the virus in chickens, immediate culling and careful monitoring of people exposed to the virus have all helped contain the bird flu. 
In addition, hunting and sales of poultry in open-air markets have been banned, and authorities launched a public awareness campaign urging limited contact with fowl in largely rural Turkey, where many families raise their own chickens. Children have been found to be at special risk because they are often the ones who care for the birds. 
In its current form, the virus can only be caught through contact with infected poultry. Experts, however, worry that if H5N1 is not contained, it could mutate into a form that is easily transmitted among people, potentially creating a global pandemic. 
Worries over bird flu have hurt Turkey's poultry industry, with sales dropping 70 per cent since the outbreak. According to Deputy Prime Minister Abdulatif Sener, the industry contributes $3 billion annually to the GDP, with annual poultry meat output at 914,000 tonnes in 2004. Annual poultry consumption averages 13kg per capita. 
The government has attempted to help poultry farmers by offering them cheap loans and favourable tax measures. The World Bank says it will offer assistance, and the industry itself has been attempting to regain consumer confidence through newspaper advertisements. 
