01/09/2009
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 01/09/09
Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov, who took office in May, has several pressing issues on his agenda. They include finding a solution to the longstanding Greece-Macedonia name dispute, gaining a start date for EU membership negotiations, and implementing visa-free travel. 
The president is also seeking to close the gap between ethnic communities in Macedonia. In an exclusive interview with SETimes contributor Goran Trajkov, he discusses his plans and policies. 
 SETimes: After becoming president, you began advocating a "reasonable compromise" with Greece on the name issue. What is a reasonable compromise? Would you support changing Macedonia's name? 
 Gjorge Ivanov: Macedonia is well-known for being a country that employs compromises and peaceful solutions in all its policies, including its foreign policy. Therefore, Macedonia, its leaders and citizens, remain committed to the strategies of dialogue and compromise that will bring friendship, co-operation and prosperity for us, our neighbours and the whole region. 
We have shown a clear political will because Macedonia wants to put this problem behind us. The mediator, our partners and allies in EU and NATO, as well as many Greek leaders, know that an unprincipled compromise will not bring any good to any of our countries. This is because a dishonoured and offended nation cannot be a real ally or friend. 
Therefore, it is simply "reasonable" that all future solutions and compromises should bear in mind the need not to offend or disregard the identity and dignity of our citizens. Only these kinds of compromises -- that cherish the traditions, values and identity of the citizens -- can be considered by the political leadership of the country. 
 SETimes: What is Macedonia's role in regional co-operation? 
 Ivanov Macedonia was and remains a crucial factor for the stability and security in the Balkan region. We conceive that with our policies of constant increasing of the co-operation with all our neighbours and with our active role in the regional initiatives, our country is becoming stronger and more prosperous, and it supports the security and development of the whole region. 
 SETimes: Since Macedonia already has the status of being an EU candidate country, do you expect a date soon for starting negotiations? 
 Ivanov Macedonia, its leaders, all relevant political factors and the entire society are strongly dedicated to the process of euro-integration. Our country has shown great political will in this process and our society is constantly reforming and has reached highest European standards in many areas. It is more than clear that Macedonia has both strong political will and determination, and the needed institutional capacity to go through this process successfully. 
 SETimes: Recently, the European Commission gave Macedonia the green light for visa liberalisation. What kind of impact do you expect this decision to have? 
 Ivanov The visa liberalisation process would be a great impetus for the European way of life and the spirit of every Macedonian citizen. It would open wide the doors of cultural, education and business co-operation of our citizens with the citizens, businesses and institutions from around the continent. And this is crucial for the further Europeanisation of our society. 
The modernisation of our society in different sectors, the functional market economy and even the prospects for attracting [foreign direct investment] in the country have increased with this new development. I strongly believe that this is a big step in the process of achieving fast and sustainable development of our society and its integration in the EU. 
 SETimes: You recently visited Croatia, which is already in the process of EU accession negotiations. What were the main talking points with Croatian President Stipe Mesic? 
 Ivanov My official visit to Croatia was very productive and friendly. Macedonia and Croatia have traditionally friendly relations and went together through many processes in the region. Our countries share a dedication to regional co-operation and full Euro-Atlantic integration. 
We went to Croatia with a large business delegation in order promote the possibilities for economic co-operation. I think that the friendly relations between the two countries will be strengthened even further through the strong ties of our business communities. 
 SETimes: How do you plan to bridge ethnic divisions in Macedonian society? 
 Ivanov The multicultural character of our society is a European and Macedonian value. Even more, the mechanisms for protection of the ethnic, religious and cultural identity of the citizens and communities which are integrated in the Macedonian Constitution are a courageous solution, and a bright example for any modern society. 
The Ohrid Agreement has provided a strong framework for the unity of the country and our citizens, and has strengthened further the cohesion of the Macedonian society. 
During my presidency, [through] all my initiatives, projects and activities, I am making efforts to promote the confidence and co-operation between different communities, as well as among citizens coming from different ethnic and religious backgrounds. I will always emphasize to all our political leaders, but also all other relevant stakeholders in our society, that they have to promote these values of our nation, because they represent the authentic identity and real strength of the Macedonian society. 
