05/04/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 05/04/10
Singer Milan Stankovic will represent Serbia at the upcoming Eurovision song contest in Norway with the song "This Is the Balkans". 
Stankovic, 23, is best known for taking part in a music reality show in Serbia. He has so far recorded one album. 
This year, because of the economic crisis facing Serbia, there was a competition among only three contestants. In years past, viewers could choose among as many as 24 songs. 
Serbian state television, which organised the competition, hired renowned composer Goran Bregovic to compose all three songs. Bregovic, one of the most famed Balkan composers, formerly led the popular Yugoslav band Bijelo Dugme ("White Button"). 
Bregovic was also allowed to choose the singers who would perform the songs. He chose two little known singers, Milan Stankovic and Oliver Katic, plus a rising star, Emina Jahovic. 
Viewers decided the winner by voting via text message. 
Although all three songs are similar and represent a mix of ethno and dance rhythms, competition was stiff and the outcome uncertain. Out of some 129,000 votes, Stankovic's "This is the Balkans" won a little less than half, but enough to win. 
He will perform in the first semifinal round in Oslo on May 25th. 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CeFDQ0ioC0U 
Stankovic was visibly excited when the results were announced. 
 "I don't know what to say now, except that I am extremely pleased and that it is a great honour for me to represent Serbia," he said. "The audience recognised the positive energy carried by our song and I thank them for that from the bottom of my heart." 
Bregovic explained that he wrote numbers hoping to cheer people up. "How well the song will do at the Eurovision contest is not as important as how much we want people here to like it, to listen to it and be cheered by it," he said. 
Bregovic also said that until recently he found Eurovision somewhat boring. "Before, everyone tried to write hit songs. Now you have the young and cheeky from Kazakhstan, Georgia … now the festival is good and I like watching it." 
The composer said he was very satisfied with the manner in which the Serbian contest was carried out and he did not favour any particular singer. "The songs suited them and they performed them excellently," he said. 
A portion of the proceeds from the viewers' text messages will go towards construction of a safe house for women and children who are victims of domestic violence. 
