15/03/2011
By Elisabeth Maragoula for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 15/03/11
The Athens Stock Market jumped more than 5% on Monday (March 14th), buoyed in part by Friday's decision by eurozone leaders to ease the loan payback terms for Greece. The officials also adopted other strategies to tackle Europe's sovereign debt crisis. 
 The agreement includes an extension on the loan maturity from three to 7.5 years, and a reduction in the interest rate by 100 basis points, or from an average of 5.2% to 4.2%, essentially allowing the cash-strapped country a savings of about six billion euros in paying back last year's 110 billion-euro EU-IMF bailout loan package. 
 Prime Minister George Papandreou hailed the decisions as "a clear indication of the appreciation for the effort being made by the Greek people". 
Analysts also note the significance. 
The summit delivered more than seemed likely beforehand, according to Howard Archer, chief European economist at the London-based consultancy IHS Global Insight. 
The leaders' "comprehensive" plan to get the euro on track is due to be formally adopted at the next EU summit next week. 
 "The eurozone leaders agreed to boost the firepower and flexibility of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF); made progress on the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), which will replace the EFSF in mid-2013; and also agreed on a pact that aims to strengthen economic co-ordination and governance among eurozone member countries and boost their competitiveness where it is lagging," Archer wrote in a research note. 
Although significant, these decisions are only a step towards reaching a distant end goal. 
 "This is an important step in dealing with the eurozone sovereign debt crisis, but any respite in the markets will prove to be only a temporary reprieve if countries do not deliver the required action on public finances, banks and boosting long-term competitiveness," Archer wrote. 
Although Greece is making progress, and now has additional understanding and support from the 17 eurozone country leaders, more work lies ahead. 
 "Extending the maturity to 7.5 years is a little help, but clearly not enough," Zsolt Darvas, a resident scholar at the Brussels-based think-tank Bruegel, told SETimes. "The Greek government has to reach a very significant primary surplus to put the debt/GDP ratio to a sufficiently declining path, or they have to speed up greatly economic growth. That's what they are working on, that they are doing very significant structural reforms," Darvas explained. 
Jens Bastian, senior economic research fellow for Southeast Europe at the Greek think-tank Hellenic Foundation for European and Foreign Policy offered similar analyses about the recent concessions. 
 "I think they are a small but necessary contribution. Do they solve the problem? No. This is not something that the eurozone can achieve during a summit over a weekend," Bastian told SETimes. 
 "So this was, I think, a repair job; and it's a necessary one. But it doesn't fundamentally solve the underlying issues that Greece has to deal with and that also the eurozone has to address," Bastian said. 
With unemployment reportedly at 14.8% in December 2010, more austerity measures are not at the top of Greeks' wish list, but more could be exactly what's in store if tax evasion doesn't stop. 
 "Greece has to show that in terms of the government, the central bank, but also the corporate environment that they have a hold on the problems and that they can deliver what they have also signed up to," Bastian said. 
If anything is clear from the summit's outcome, it is that Greece needs its euro-partners' support, not "only" a bailout. 
"It has been shown in the past months that throwing money at the problems is just not good enough," Bastian said. 
