03/06/2013
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/06/13 
The the Fiscal Council of Serbia recently told parliament that the state may face a severe economic crisis unless it urgently starts resolving the matter of debts and budget deficit. 
Council Chairman Pavle Petrovic told SETimes that a budget rebalance is necessary to fill up the gap in the state treasury, because Serbia has not reduced its budget deficit or taken on structural reforms on time. 
"Significant savings in 2013 and 2014 are impossible without control of salaries and pensions," Petrovic said. "That immediately yields savings, whereas other measures, such as the reduction of the number of public sector employees and pension reform, require several years before they start producing results." 
Possible budget cuts, offered by the council could put a serious dent in the ruling coalition's popularity among the citizens, who have been waiting for an end to the crisis for years. 
Economic issues were the focus of the May 2012 election campaign, after which the Democratic Party became the opposition. After the initial successes of the new authorities in the fight against corruption and the negotiations with Kosovo, the economic situation is once again became the main problem in Serbia. 
First Deputy Prime Minister Aleksandar Vucic described the country's economic situation as a "nightmare." He called for government talks on the situation. 
"We must talk about this, to see how we can cure the Serbian economy, even if it leads to our losing the next elections," Vucic told journalists in Belgrade. 
But there is no unity within the government on freezing salaries and pensions. Another Deputy Prime Minister Jovan Krkobabic said freezing salaries would be tantamount to genocide of the elderly population. 
"Pensions in Serbia will neither be reduced nor frozen for as long as I am in the Serbian government," Krkobabic said. "I've made that clear to my coalition partners, as well as to the representatives of the IMF." 
At the same time, Vucic admitted that Belgrade is going through tough negotiations with the IMF, aimed at making a new arrangement that would bring the state and foreign investors a measure of security in the Serbian economy. 
"The IMF said we have to freeze salaries in the public sector and drastically cut down expenditures, and we cannot increase taxes because that would additionally deaden economic activities," he said. 
If the country has to freeze public salaries and pensions, they should do it now, Sasa Djogovic of the Institute for Market Research told SETimes. "Delaying that measure could put us in a position where we later have to reduce salaries and pensions," he said. 
Djogovic said that Serbia failed to reform the public sector in a timely manner and that is now suffocating "private initiative and healthy companies in the market." Moreover, Serbia's situation is made more difficult by the fact that it has not carried out "comprehensive reforms of the pension, health care and education systems and public administration," said Djogovic. 
The Serbian cabinet is facing a difficult choice, because it has to rebalance the budget and cut down the deficit, and small savings are not effective in that case, Miroslav Prokopijevic of the Institute for European Studies told SETimes. 
"The choice is this: either freeze or reduce salaries in the public sector and pensions, or downsize capital investment and the purchase of goods and services," said Prokopijevic. 
What measures should be taken to improve the economic situation in Serbia? Tell us what you think in the comments. 
