13/11/2008
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 13/11/08
The European Commission (EC) progress report on Albania, released on November 5th, said corruption, judicial deficiencies, politicisation of the civil service and organised crime remain the biggest hurdles for the country. 
"Corruption remains widespread," the report says. It cited the blast at the Gerdec ammunition dump that killed 17 people in March as an example still requiring an investigation. "To ensure credibility in the fight against corruption, the allegations around this case need to be tackled with resolve," the report notes. 
It also singled out the judiciary. "Judicial procedures have remained slow and lack transparency," the EC said, urging greater judicial accountability. 
Money laundering, drug trafficking and organised crime remain serious concerns. "Limited progress can be reported in the fight against organised crime, which is a key European Partnership priority," the report said. 
The document criticised public procurement laws and their implementation for failing to comply with the relevant provisions of the EC. Overall, reconciling Albanian law with the acquis has been overly slow, according to the report, which also faulted Albania for poor enforcement of its laws. 
The EC then addressed political appointments to the civil service, describing them as a handicap to accountability and to the civil service's independence. "Appointments have continued along political party lines in contravention of the Civil Service Law," the EC said. 
It furthermore accused Albania of a lack of transparency and insufficient dialogue among its political parties. 
However, not all of the EC's findings were negative. The commission noted Albania has made progress in democracy and the rule of law, management of federal police and financial and taxation policies. 
The government played up the comments acknowledging Albania's progress. "The ... report is a confirmation of Albania's achievements towards Euro-Atlantic integration, driving the government to work harder to fulfil the standards," Prime Minister Sali Berisha said. 
"We ... are implementing the law on conflicts of interest, putting anti-corruption issues at the top of our agenda," Integration Minister Majlinda Bregu told parliament last week. 
The opposition says, however, the government has not taken responsibility for the key issues the country needs to confront. Conflicting interpretations of the report became the centre of a heated debate in parliament, prompting EU officials to issue a statement. 
"Corruption is described as a particularly serious problem for Albania," the EU envoys said in a statement issued by the French Embassy. 
"We encourage Albania to strengthen even further its reform efforts, in particular in the fields where only limited and small progress was found by the Commission's Progress Report," they said. 
