27/07/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 27/07/04
Mostar opened its rebuilt 16th-century bridge over the Neretva River on Friday (23 July), more than ten years after its destruction had come to symbolise the brutality and senselessness of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH).
Officials said the new Stari Most (Old Bridge) would symbolise a unified Mostar and the locals' commitment to peace.
"[This] confirms that the period of clashes is behind you forever," said BiH Presidency Chairman Sulejman Tihic. "Let the rebuilding of Stari Most be a triumph showing the way to building our more beautiful future."
In an evening opening attended by hundreds of dignitaries and journalists -- ironically, most Mostarians had to watch it on television at home because of the crowds and heavy security -- the multi-year, 12.3m-euro project to rebuild the bridge using methods similar to those used in the 16th century came to a close.
UNESCO and the World Bank led the project, with assistance from the governments of Croatia, Italy and the Netherlands, along with the Council of Europe.
Celebrating the bridge that night were dance troupes, a huge orchestra, choirs and fireworks. Also participating were about a half-dozen bridge divers, as for hundreds of years it was tradition for young Mostar machos to jump from the 28m-high bridge.
Emir Balic, 69, who logged hundreds of jumps in his day, said he'd leave jumping from the new bridge to the new generation.
"I'm happy and sad at the same time," he told BH-TV before the opening, saying that 23 of his fellow jumpers had been killed during the war.
The original bridge was finished in 1566, and gave the nearby Turkish settlement its name: Mostar is derived from a word meaning "keeper of the bridge".
The bridge survived for centuries, but didn't survive the bitter Muslim-Croat fighting that broke out in 1993. In November of that year, the bridge fell after a lengthy onslaught by Croat gunners.
Though Croats and Muslims were brought into an uneasy federation the next year, Mostar has remained a divided and often tense town since the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH ended.
The drive to rebuild the bridge took off after the first cornerstone was laid in 2002. Divers earlier removed the original stones from the river, but the site manager of the Turkish construction company doing the reconstruction told SE Times last year that the stones would only be used to fortify the bridge's right and left banks.
It's hoped that the new bridge will draw in the tourists that once flocked here, and that it will span not only the two river banks, but hearts and minds in the still-divided town -- where Croats and Muslims have separate bus lines, hospitals and schools.
The EU conditioned BiH's ability to move closer to accession on Mostar's reunification, and in January, High Representative Paddy Ashdown replaced the town's six municipal assemblies with one.
"[BiH's] long, often difficult, frequently frustrating, usually painful, but nonetheless steady ascent from the ruin of war to the benefits of peace, shows that countries can be rebuilt -- and indeed, they can be rebuilt relatively quickly," Ashdown said at the opening.
