28/07/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 28/07/09
A new amendment met resistance last week, as Turkey's constitutional court decided to consider the secular opposition Republican People's Party's (CHP) request to annul it. 
The reform, which allows civilian courts to prosecute military officers for some crimes, and take legal action in peacetime for acts against national security, constitutional violations and attempts to topple the government, was approved by President Abdullah Gul on July 8th. 
Parliament passed it last month. 
Gul wanted to "dispel worries" among military, and said the measure is part of Turkey's bid to join the EU. The army, however, opposes the law, claiming it violates Article 145 of the constitution, regarding military justice, undermines unity, and makes top generals the target of politically-motivated cases. 
"The real problem emerges when a court is under the tutelage of an ideology or an institution, and gives its rulings just as to appease a group of people," Sabah columnist Mehmet Barlas wrote. 
The Islamist-rooted ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) pushed for the law only weeks after the press published alleged plans by some low-ranking military officials to discredit the government. 
The Turkish military, the most trusted institution in the country according to polls, had long enjoyed autonomy and flexed a strong political muscle, ousting four elected governments in the last 50 years. In various cases related to military personnel, military courts ordered the release of suspects -- much to the criticism of some, who accused the courts of bias. 
According to the Ankara Law Review, out of every 100 cases in Turkey, 54 result in acquittal. 
The EU's latest progress report on Turkey said "concerns remain about the independence and impartiality of the judiciary" and "the low quality of the investigation". 
The reform follows the notorious Ergenekon case where about 200 suspects face trial for allegedly founding, or joining a terrorist organisation to overthrow the government. Dozens of military officials and retired high-ranking officials are among the suspects. 
Some view Ergenekon as a politically-motivated case backed by the AKP to weaken secularists by linking them to extremism. 
