28/12/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 28/12/10 
Twelve-year-old Srdjan Ratkovic was a gifted student and loved football. Irfan Razanica, 14, also loved the sport, had an excellent school record and had recently performed on a TV music show called "Children Singing Hits". 
Srdjan was a Serb and Irfan a Bosniak. Despite their ethnic differences, they were similar in many ways -- enjoying the things many boys of their age do. 
Both died in shelling attacks during the violence that engulfed Bosnia and Herzegovina in the early 1990s. Srdjan was out sledding near the Skenderija Sports Centre when he was killed; Irfan was helping his father bring firewood into the house when a shell splinter struck his temple. 
Their stories are among those featured in a new book, called Crimes Against the Children of Sarajevo during the Siege. The publication provides the names of hundreds of boys and girls who died in the warfare -- along with personal data and photographs. One unidentified victim is also commemorated. 
Many drawings and letters penned by the children are included. For every child whose photo could not be obtained, the image of a white rose is provided. 
The authors are professors Smail Cekic, Muhamed Sestanovic, Merisa Karovic, and Zilha Mastalic-Kosuta. 
"It was 442 Bosniaks, 19 Croats, five Serbs, 4 Albanians, three Roma, and 51 of others," says Cekic, explaining the demographic breakdown among the children who died. 
Although Sarajevo was pronounced a UN safe zone on May 6, 1993 by UN Security Council Resolution 824, the army of the Republika Srpska continued to keep the city under siege. 
Sarajevo was exposed to mass artillery weapons, air defence guns targeting civilians, and modified airplane bombs. Shelling and sniper activity targeted the civilian population. 
This was a war in which few thought to spare children. On the contrary, many attacks were aimed deliberately at the young and vulnerable. 
The city's maternity ward came under intensive and frequent attacks, causing electricity blackouts which shut down incubators. Three babies died as a result. Meanwhile, the Ljubica Ivezic orphanage was subjected to shelling eight times during the siege. 
Children died in or around their apartments or houses, at playgrounds, at school, in line for food or water, or at shelter facilities. Adequate medical assistance was often unavailable for the wounded or sick. 
Two organisations -- the Institute for Research of Crimes Against Humanity and International Law and the Association of the Parents of Killed Children in the Besieged Sarajevo 1992-1995 -- have been collecting evidence for years. They presented their findings at a promotional event for the book's release. 
The volume totals 867 pages, even though it only includes those killed in besieged Sarajevo. The stories of many other children who died elsewhere in Bosnia and Herzegovina remain to be told. 
"This book is not a final report, the research is still ongoing," Cekic said. 
