10/05/2006
(Reuters, AFP, BBC, DPA, RFE/RL, AP - 09/05/06; AFP - 25/06/05; AP - 24/06/05)
A special war crimes court in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) launched its first genocide trial Tuesday (9 May) with the case of 11 Bosnian Serbs indicted over the 1995 Srebrenica massacre. 
The War Crimes Chamber (WCC) of the Court of BiH opened in March 2005 to ease the burden of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) by taking some of its caseload. According to reports last year, the WCC, which has international judges and prosecutors, was to focus on politically sensitive cases, leaving the majority of trials to be handled by lower courts. 
The defendants, including former army officers and special policemen, are Milos Stupar, Milenko Trifunovic, Petar Mitrovic, Brane Dzinic, Aleksandar Radovanovic, Slobodan Jakovljevic, Miladin Stevanovic, Velibor Maksimovic, Branislav Medan, Dragisa Zivanovic and Milovan Matic. They are accused of killing more than 1,000 captured Bosnian Muslims in the village of Kravica on 13 July 1995. 
The slain Muslims had been trying to flee Srebrenica, two days after it fell to Serb forces. In less than a week, up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys, aged 16 to 60, were summarily executed in the enclave, which was supposed to be a UN "safe area" at the time. 
Eight of the accused, according to prosecutor Ibro Bulic, fired their machine guns at the prisoners, while another threw hand grenades at them, Reuters reported. They first buried the victims in a mass grave near Kravica. In a bid to conceal traces of the crime, two weeks later they allegedly moved the bodies to two other mass gravesites. 
"The prosecution will ask the court to declare these men guilty so that a small step towards meeting justice can be made," Bulic told the court in his opening remarks. 
All of the accused were arrested in June of last year, weeks before the 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre. Four of them, including Stupar, 42, who served as the commander of a Bosnian Serb special police squad during the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH, were members of the Republika Srpska police force at the time of their detention. 
If convicted, the defendants could face prison sentences of between 10 and 45 years. All have pleaded not guilty. 
In August 2001, former Bosnian Serb General Radislav Krstic, one of the most senior officers and officials among the 19 people indicted by the ICTY in connection with the Srebrenica massacre, was convicted of genocide and sentenced to 46 years in prison. In a historic verdict in April 2004, a UN appeals chamber confirmed that Bosnian Serbs committed genocide at Srebrenica, but cleared the general of being a "principal perpetrator" and reduced his sentence to 35 years. 
Nearly 11 years after the massacre, described as Europe's worst atrocity since World War II, its alleged masterminds, wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander Ratko Mladic, remain at large. 
In an unrelated development Tuesday, the ICTY transferred former Bosnian Serb prison camp wardens Zeljko Mejakic, Momcilo Gruban, Dusan Fustar and Dusko Knezevic to Sarajevo after their request for trial before international judges was rejected by a UN appeals chamber last month. In 1995, the UN tribunal charged the four former commanders or top officers of the notorious Omarska and Keraterm camps with murder, torture, sexual assault and inhuman confinement of Bosnian Muslims in the summer of 1992. All suspects were transferred to the ICTY in 2002 and 2003. 
