06/07/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 06/07/06
UN deputy special envoy Albert Rohan arrived in Kosovo on Wednesday (5 July) to discuss the seventh round of Belgrade-Pristina talks, which will deal with cultural and religious heritage. 
The next round was initially scheduled to take place in Vienna on 11 July, but was postponed at the request of Belgrade. 
On Wednesday, Rohan visited several Serb villages in Kosovo as well as the Decani Monastery, talking with residents and Serb Orthodox religious leaders. 
The tour was part of the envoy's efforts to reconcile the positions of Belgrade and Pristina on protection zones for cultural and religious monuments, the creation of Serb municipalities and other issues. He has brought with him 12 maps setting forth possible protection zones. 
The two sides have agreed on the basic principles regarding the protection of cultural and religious heritage, though they continue to differ on many details, including who should have authority. On the broader issue of decentralisation, they remain far apart. The Serbian delegation has called for numerous autonomous municipalities with ties to each other and Belgrade, while Pristina objects to attempts at "partition" along ethnic lines. 
"There won't be signing of agreements on the issue of cultural and religious heritage and on the process of decentralisation, but we will try to bring the positions of the parties closer," Rohan said. 
He also urged Kosovo's leaders to intensify their commitment to fulfilling the UN-set standards. "The two standards: freedom of movement and sustainable return are the most important. But we need to see more commitment on these issues," he said. 
Rohan's visit comes ahead of UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's consultations with the Security Council in mid-July, when he is expected to call on the ethnic Albanian and Serb delegations to discuss Kosovo's future status later this month. 
Still technically part of Serbia, Kosovo has been administered by the UN since the 1999 NATO air campaign that forced Serbian troops out of the province. Its ethnic Albanian majority overwhelmingly favours independence, while Belgrade is seeking some form of continued sovereignty. 
US Ambassador to Belgrade Michael Polt said this week that independence is "one of the possible outcomes" and that Serbia will not change the international community's viewpoint by repeating that this is unacceptable. Both sides will have to make concessions, he said, reiterating Washington's stance that a solution should be found by the end of this year. 
Neither Belgrade nor Pristina will be able to achieve everything they want, Polt said. 
