07/06/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/06/11 
Serbia's football and state authorities nervously awaited UEFA President Michel Platini's recent visit to Belgrade. Things reached boiling point when the Frenchman asked to meet with the head of state, President Boris Tadic. 
Platini threatened to expel Serbian clubs and the national team from all European competitions unless Belgrade stopped football hooligans and violence at stadiums. 
The response was quick -- a special police unit was formed that will suppress hooligan violence. 
Police general Mladen Kuribak told the Belgrade daily Press that police had declared war on hooligans and are building a database of those involved in riots at sporting events. "As of May 5th, we have begun registering extreme fans. All those who have thus far answered for misdemeanors and crimes with an element of violence will be placed in that database," Kuribak said. 
Those who have broken the law at sports matches will no longer be allowed to enter stadiums, and hooligans will most likely be prevented from attending the matches of clubs and the national team abroad. 
Serbian hooligans have been under UEFA's watchful eye for years now. But matters took a sharp turn for the worst after the murder of French football fan Brice Taton prior to a match in Belgrade in September 2009, and the riots Serbian fans provoked before the game with Italy in October 2010. 
An efficient clampdown on hooligans is a condition for Serbian football to remain in European competitions. UEFA will monitor Serbia's games over the next six months. Experts in Belgrade warn that the expulsion of clubs and the national team would be fatal. 
 "Expulsion from European competitions would push clubs, which are already in a difficult position, to the brink of ruin. Clubs earn money from the sale of players, and their price would decrease additionally if they were unable to demonstrate their skills on the European scene," Belgrade sports journalist Marko Protic tells SETimes. 
 He says introducing the special police unit is "a step in the right direction", but emphasises that other measures need introducing -- draconian penalties for all who cause riots at games, trials at stadiums and the installation of video surveillance at sporting facilities. 
Other analysts say that now is a good time to crackdown on all forms of extremism. 
"Police can easily deal with extreme fans, but other security services and the judiciary must also get involved in that process. Only then will such extremism be pushed to the margins," Belgrade Faculty of Security professor Zoran Dragisic tells SETimes. 
He notes that extreme fans are supported by extreme political forces, which is why the role of the state and political will is crucial. 
Many also believe football clubs pander to the hooligans, so they too are responsible for the situation. However, Belgrade's Red Star club spokesman Marko Nikolovski tells SETimes that his club "lacks the institutions to solve the hooligan problem ... Even Platini himself made it clear that the Football Association and the state have to deal with this." 
But Protic thinks the clubs should do their part of the job better. "The managements or parts of managements of clubs are connected to the fans. They depend on each other, hence, there is no readiness yet to establish a normal relationship between the fans and management, like the one in countries with developed football," he says. 
