18/05/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 18/05/13 
Balkan countries need to focus on joint projects that will harness water resources to improve the regional energy supply, analysts and experts said. 
Panzo Andonov, former director of Macedonian hydropower plant Kozjak, noted the UN- sponsored study on the energy potential of the Vardar River from the 1960s that suggested a joint energy supply effort in the Balkans. 
"That study is still the basis for projects today. Since water flows across national borders, it allows for joint projects. For example, the Vardar River projects can be used for joint projects with Greece, in confluence with the River Drim in Albania," Andonov told SETimes. 
Gligor Kanevce, a sustainable energy professor at the Bitola technical faculty, agrees there is a need for more energy-generating facilities, but also for the rebuilding of existing ones. 
"A reconstruction of existing plants is also needed. In Macedonia, one phase of rebuilding large power plants ended, and a second phase is on-going. With their renovation, energy efficiency will not be disrupted," Kanevce told SETimes. 
Ivan Miksic, director of an energy equipment company in Karlovac, Croatia, said that regional countries should maximise their energy resources and negotiate joint projects in the region. 
"Croatia is negotiating the construction of several joint energy facilities with Bosnia and Herzegovina, and available opportunities should be maximised. We need to join forces in building bigger power plants, which will yield optimum usage," Miksic told SETimes. 
Currently, the largest regional project is the construction of cross-border transmission lines for electricity on a high-voltage grid connection. 
"The project will connect transmission lines between Macedonia and Serbia, from Stip to Nis, connect transmission lines from Macedonia to Albania, and upgrade lines to Kosovo. We are also expecting benefits for other countries from hydropower plant projects in Macedonia," Vlatko Cingoski, the former director of ELEM power plants in Macedonia, told SETimes. 
The Drim Basin project, which includes Macedonia, Albania, Kosovo, Montenegro and Greece, will determine the actual power capacity of the Drim River. Hydroelectric power plants have been built in Macedonia and Albania, Dejan Panovski, member of the Drim Kor Group in Macedonia, told SETimes. 
"Drim basin hydro potential is under used and needs improvement, but with caution to minimise the negative effects and possible destruction to the basin's eco system, which is the main goal of the Drim project. The first results show a potential for more energy use of water," Panovski said. 
"Only 40 percent of water potential is used in the region," Zdenko Jugovic, a power plant worker in Croatia, told SETimes. 
 What steps should regional countries take to best explore natural energy resources? Let us know.  
