03/11/2005
(Xinhua - 03/11/05; AP, Athens News Agency, Macedonian Press Agency, Reporter.gr, SEE Security Monitor, Sofia News Agency, Rompres, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 02/11/05)
The Greek Parliament on Wednesday (2 November) ratified Bulgaria and Romania's accession treaty with the EU, under which the two Balkan countries are to join the bloc in January 2007. The assembly's special session was attended by the Bulgarian and Romanian presidents, Georgi Parvanov and Traian Basescu, as well as by their Greek counterpart, Karolos Papoulias. 
An overwhelming majority of lawmakers in the 300-seat parliament supported the two countries' treaty. Only the Communist Party voted against, for the same reasons it opposed Greece's own entry into the EU about 30 years ago. 
Greece thus became the fifth EU member after Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia and Cyprus to approve the agreement, signed in Luxembourg on 25 April. The document, which must be ratified by all EU nations by 31 December 2006 for Bulgaria and Romania to be able to enter the Union on schedule, is expected to be approved also by the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania by the end of this year. 
Last month, the European Commission (EC) warned Bulgaria and Romania that they must speed up implementation of required reforms to avoid accession being delayed by one year. The EC is due to decide whether the two countries are prepared to meet the obligations of EU membership in April or May next year. 
 Thanking Greece for ratifying the treaty, Parvanov voiced confidence that, despite difficulties, Bulgaria will meet its EU commitments. Basescu made a similar statement. 
"Bulgaria and Romania's EU accession will boost the voice of the Balkans in Europe," Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis said in an address to MPs. "This opens new prospects for strengthening regional co-operation." 
Voicing hope that the other Balkan countries will also move forward on the path to EU membership, Karamanlis said this would "secure regional peace, stability and democracy". 
 Later in the day, Karamanlis, Parvanov and Basescu met for their 4th tripartite co-operation summit. They discussed a range of issues, including the European prospects of the Balkans, the status of Kosovo, and the establishment of a Regional Situational Centre to co-ordinate responses to natural disasters. 
During their visit to Athens, Parvanov and Basescu also held separate meetings with Papoulias and George Papandreou, the leader of the main opposition PASOK party. On Thursday, Parvanov travels to Bucharest for a two-day official visit at Basescu's invitation. 
