20/08/2009
(Independent, Wall Street Journal, Finfacts.ie, Nine O'clock - 20/08/09; CNN, RFE/RL, Novinite, IMF - 19/08/09; Reuters, Bloomberg, Market Watch - 18/08/09)
The global economy is beginning to recuperate from its deepest recession in 60 years, IMF chief economist Olivier Blanchard said in a paper published Wednesday (August 19th). But the process will be slow, he cautioned. 
"The recovery has started. Sustaining it will require delicate rebalancing acts, both within and across countries," Blanchard wrote. 
Rebalancing from public to private spending is one measure that would help sustain the world recovery, he added. An increase in US net exports to China and other Asian countries with current account surpluses is also needed. 
The crisis that hit the world last autumn is far from normal, the economist said. Therefore, models used to understand past recessions are inapplicable in the current situation. 
"The turnaround will not be simple," Blanchard said. "The crisis has left deep scars, which will affect both supply and demand for many years to come." 
Most countries are set to see positive economic growth for the next few quarters, he noted. It will not be as vigorous as needed to reduce unemployment in the short term, however. 
Stressing that economic stimulus programmes should not be kept in place longer than needed, he said they could be prolonged, only if accompanied by structural measures "to limit the future growth of entitlement programmes". 
"IMF estimates suggest that the fiscal cost of future increases in entitlements is ten times the fiscal cost of the crisis," said Blanchard. "Thus, even a modest cut in the growth rate of entitlement programmes can buy substantial fiscal space for continuing stimulus. Eventually, however, the fiscal stimulus will have to be phased out, and private demand must replace it." 
"In nearly all countries, the costs of the crisis have added to the fiscal burden, and higher taxation is inevitable," Blanchard said. "All this means that we may not go back to the old growth path, that potential output may be lower than it was before the crisis." 
On the basis of an analysis of 88 banking crises in a wide range of countries over the past 40 years, the IMF has concluded that, on average, they permanently reduce the level of output, but not its growth rate. 
"So, if past is prologue, the world economy likely will return to its past growth rate," Blanchard said. "But, especially in advanced countries, the period of above-average growth, characteristic of normal recoveries, may be short-lived or nonexistent." 
He also stressed that an understanding of the issues and the risks posed by the crisis, as well as some co-ordination across countries, would likely be of crucial importance during the next few years. 
