10/02/2005
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 10/02/05
If everything goes as planned, Croatia will begin accession negotiations with the EU on 17 March. However, a serious obstacle remains: the issue of co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. Zagreb is facing increased domestic and international pressure to locate and hand over fugitive General Ante Gotovina, one of the tribunal's three most-wanted suspects. 
On Saturday (5 February), the EU again made it clear that action must be taken in the case to secure the country's bid to join the 25-nation Union. "We expect the Croatian government to find the fugitive and extradite him to The Hague," said Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn, whose country currently holds the EU's rotating presidency. 
Meanwhile, a leading Croatian daily Jutarnji list, has reported that negotiations with the EU may well be postponed indefinitely unless Gotovina is brought to justice. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said in late January that, on the basis of information available to him, he could not recommend opening negotiations in March. An upcoming report by UN chief war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte is expected to strongly influence the EU's decision on proceeding. 
Del Ponte declined to say what her recommendation would be, telling reporters that "I'm staying out of politics." She referred the question to EU security chief Javier Solana -- who made it clear he and the bloc would defer to her. 
"We will listen to del Ponte before taking any decision," Solana said. "The advice ... will be absolutely fundamental for the final decision." 
Last week, the National Security Council, under the joint chairmanship of Croatian President Stipe Mesic and Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, ordered police to step up efforts to locate and arrest Gotovina. The council also urged increased collaboration with other countries to that end. 
Gotovina's lawyer has indicated that his client is seeking a compromise under which his trial would take place in Croatia. The tribunal, however, has said it does not negotiate with fugitives. 
