11/08/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 11/08/05
Half a decade after the democratic revolution of 2000, one of the most important items on the political agenda has yet to be achieved. Even though all the political parties agree on the need for a new Serbian Constitution, they have so far proved unable to adopt one. Instead, they are pointing fingers and accusing each other of blocking the process. 
 The parliamentary constitutional committee tasked with coming up with the document has so far only met irregularly. That will soon change, vows Milos Aligrudic, a committee member who belongs to Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS). 
"We have to adopt the new constitution as soon as possible," he says, predicting that work will intensify this month. "Once we get a working draft, the rest of the work is rather technical." 
 In fact, two drafts of the constitution already exist -- one prepared by Kostunica's government, and one by the office of Serbian President Boris Tadic, who leads the opposition Democratic Party (DP). Parliament is at loggerheads over which draft to use. Reportedly, the ruling coalition has joined forces with the ultra nationalist Radicals to try to push through the government version, but it still faces substantial opposition. 
One possible reason for the delays is that parties benefit from keeping the status quo. The DP, according to Kostunica and his allies, wants to prevent the presidency -- currently an elected position -- from becoming a post that is appointed by parliament. On the other hand, the DP argues that ruling coalition members are blocking the process because they stand to lose in parliamentary elections that would be held once the constitution is adopted. 
But political differences are not solely to blame. According to Vladimir Todoric, co-ordinator of Serbia-Montenegro's EU accession programme, the unresolved issue of the state union and the status of Kosovo are also contributing factors. "We cannot adopt a lasting and prosperous constitution" until these issues are resolved, he says. 
Nevertheless, the clock is ticking. Negotiations with the EU are likely to begin this fall, and Brussels has made clear that adopting a new constitution is a key requirement for signing a Stablisation and Association Agreement. Some optimists believe the talks could be completed by the end of 2006. If so, that would leave Serbia's politicians little more than a year to iron out all the issues they have been unable to resolve since 2000. 
