09/02/2007
(AP, AFP, International Herald Tribune, The New York Times, The New Anatolian - 08/02/07; Zaman - 07/02/07; AP, BBC, VOA, Turkish Daily News - 06/02/07; AFP, BBC - 02/02/07)
A senior Turkish police officer was removed from duty this week following revelations that police were warned in advance about the planned murder of Turkish-Armenian journalist Hrant Dink. Police reportedly received a tip about the plot in February 2006. 
"I admit all my guilt for not sharing the intelligence I received regarding the assassination plot," a report in The New Anatolian on Thursday (February 8th) quoted the head of Istanbul's police intelligence, Ahmet Ilhan Guler, as saying. 
He was suspended late Monday as part of the investigation into the murder. The Interior Ministry also has reportedly cleared the way for a probe into Istanbul Police Chief Celalettin Cerrah's actions. Dink, 52, the editor-in-chief of the Istanbul-based bilingual Turkish-Armenian newspaper Agos, was gunned down in broad daylight on January 19th, outside his office. 
Ogun Samast, a 17-year-old from the eastern city of Trabzon, has confessed to killing the journalist because he "insulted Turkish blood". Seven other people have been arrested on suspicion of involvement in the case. All of them are from Trabzon. 
Dink angered Turkish nationalists by maintaining that the killings of some 1.5 million Armenians in the waning days of the Ottoman empire amounted to genocide, a characterisation that Ankara firmly denies. 
Trabzon Governor Huseyin Yavuzdemir and Police Chief Resat Altay were removed from office soon after the murder. 
Guler's suspension came only days after five police officers and five members of the Gendarmerie in the Black Sea province of Samsun were dismissed after the release of video footage that showed them posing alongside Samast and giving him a "hero's welcome". 
The footage rekindled concerns among Turks about the existence of a shadowy "deep state" -- a term denoting hardline nationalists operating within the state ready to breach the law in defence of their beliefs. 
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has pledged to deal with what he described as "gangs within state institutions". 
Dink's funeral was attended by more than 100,000 people, who silently expressed their protest against hardline nationalism, blaming his death also on Article 301 in Turkey's penal code. 
Like Orhan Pamuk, the winner of last year's Nobel Prize for literature, and scores of other Turkish intellectuals, Dink was prosecuted under the controversial article, which makes it a crime to "insult Turkishness". 
A group of ten civic organisations submitted a proposal Thursday to amend the article, which has been widely criticised by the EU and international rights groups. "We believe our proposal will help overcome existing difficulties," Davut Okutcu, the head of the Economic Development Foundation, said in a televised news conference. 
The proposed amendments seek to better distinguish between legal criticism and illegal denigration. Among other changes, the draft reportedly proposes that the phrase "insulting Turkishness" be replaced by "openly scorning and deriding" the Turkish identity. Some groups, however, say Article 301 should be scrapped altogether, rather than simply toned down. 
"Leading up to the general elections in November, the government has escaped from political responsibility on a controversial issue like Article 301 in fear of losing voters," the International Herald Tribune quoted Gencay Gurun, the general secretary of the Turkish Chamber of Doctors, as saying on Thursday. 
"Changes are only a facade and can never prevent bitter consequences, as we've witnessed with Mr. Dink's murder," he said.
