21/07/2011
By Erl Murati for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 21/07/11 
As soon as she gets her monthly pension, Jolanda Kena hurries to the drugstore. She is 61 years old and doctors diagnosed her with uterine cancer four months ago. She has decided to cure herself with what she calls "a miraculous medicine", Vidatox. 
"In fact, it is not a real medicine. It is scorpions' oil. Some said it could help me cure the disease. I have chosen this treatment, but at the same time I am continuing chemotherapy," Kena tells SETimes. 
There is a debate in Albania among oncologists concerning trade in Vidatox. Sale of the product is prohibited in the United States and the EU, but the use of homeopathic products and treatments in Albania is largely unregulated. 
Speaking to SETimes, the administrator of the company Pharma-Matrix that trades the medicine, Thoma Jance, explains that Vidatox is a completely natural product produced in Cuba. "It fights tumour cells and has a very small dose of blue scorpion venom," he says. 
"I can't say it may replace chemotherapy or make a miracle happen. But, it has been used in 10,000 persons and now it is verified that it can reduce tumour masses. One of these examples is me." 
Vidatox was only introduced to the Albanian market two months ago and state authorities were caught unprepared by legislative issues. 
"Vidatox is not a registered medicine in Albania and the medicine regulatory list does not contain any homeopathic products. We should understand whether this product produces the effects for which it got publicity or if it is a pure fraud. On the other hand, we cannot impede one's use of traditional medicine," Ahmet Hysa, head of the Pharmaceutical Directory in the Ministry of Health, tells SETimes. 
While authorities work to verify the documentation, Physician's Order, an agency that operates on behalf of the health ministry, has suspended two doctors, Aurora Skenderi and Melinda Agolli, who have recommended the use of Vidatox. 
Neither was licensed by the ministry, a binding procedure for all those who want to practice medicine. Both doctors say they were trained by Cuban colleagues before recommending Vidatox to their patients. 
Officials at Alb-Shkenca Institute advise all patients to be careful, even sceptical of this new therapy. 
Professor Niko Qafoku and Dr. Altin Stafa tell SETimes "Actually, there is no research published in any prestigious medical magazine that illustrates the functioning mechanism of this substance. The manufacturers of Vidatox did not offer any clear clinical or scientific experimental proof of the substance." 
While the debate continues, Vidatox is being sold in drugstores. A 30ml bottle goes for 98 euros. Patients like Kena consider it of value, if not physically, at least psychologically. Only time will show if she made the right choice. 
