08/02/2007
(Zaman, The New Anatolian - 08/02/07; AP, RFE/RL, Turkish Daily News, Hurriyet, US Department of State - 07/02/07; AP, DPA, AKI, The Guardian, Turkish Weekly, US Department of State - 06/02/07; AP, Turkish Daily News - 05/02/07)
The best way to deal with separatist Kurdish rebels staging attacks on Turkish territory from bases in northern Iraq would involve dialogue with the Kurdish regional government, rather than military intervention, a top US diplomat said on Wednesday (February 7th). 
"I think there are serious risks if Turkey moves in, and I hope that we're able to work with Turkey so this choice can be avoided," the AP quoted US Assistant Secretary of State Daniel Fried as saying in an interview broadcast on CNN-Turk. 
The fight against militants from the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), who use northern Iraq's Kurdish region as a launch pad for attacks on Turkish territory, topped the agenda of Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul's talks with US officials in Washington this week. Outlawed in Turkey, the PKK is considered a terrorist organisation by both the United States and the EU. 
Gul, who began his six-day visit to the United States on Monday, called for greater US co-operation. 
"We have conveyed to US officials that they are late in taking action in northern Iraq, and the Turkish people want to see an action," Gul said in a statement late Tuesday. "US officials are aware of this," he added hours after his meeting with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. 
Last August, Washington appointed retired General Joseph Ralston, a former NATO supreme allied commander, as the co-ordinator of US efforts to deal with the PKK. 
"In terms of the PKK, I think that everybody is in agreement that we want to try to resolve this issue," State Department spokesman Sean McCormack told reporters during a briefing Tuesday. "General Ralston is working to decrease those tensions on both sides of the border." 
Another key issue on Gul's agenda was a non-binding US congressional resolution, likely to be discussed in March, that condemns the killings of up to 1.5 million Armenians in the waning days of the Ottoman empire as genocide. Such resolutions have no direct bearing on policy and no legal impact. Nevertheless, the minister warned, the bill could seriously affect ties. 
"I believe that Turkish-American relations should not be taken hostage by this issue," Gul said. [But] "I see this as a real threat to our relationship." 
The White House has opposed similar legislation in the past. On Wednesday, McCormack said the administration understands the sensitivities in Turkey, in communities in the United States and in other parts of the world, and has conveyed Ankara's concerns. 
Other issues Gul and Rice discussed on Tuesday included Lebanon, Iran, the Middle East, Turkish-EU relations and Kosovo. On Monday, the Turkish foreign minister met with Vice President Dick Cheney, Defence Secretary Robert Gates and the president's National Security Adviser, Stephen Hadley. 
