25/07/2012
By Linda Karadaku, Safet Kabashaj and Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 25/07/12
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon urged Kosovo and Serbia to move forward in normalising relations between the neighbouring countries during meetings with officials in Pristina and Belgrade on this week. 
"I have emphasized to all the leaders the crucial importance of taking further steps for greater understanding," Ban Ki Moon told reporters at Pristina Airport, where he met Kosovo President Atifete Jahjaga and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci on Tuesday (July 24th). 
The UN chief expressed concern with the situation in northern Kosovo and the escalation of tensions during the past year. 
"It is essential that … issues related to northern Kosovo be resolved through peaceful dialogue. The views of the communities most directly affected by tensions are paramount. Their basic needs and rights must be democratically represented," Ban said. 
Officials in Serbia, meanwhile, told Ban that they want the UN to become part of the ongoing talks between Belgrade and Pristina. The dialogue was initiated, and has been facilitated, by the EU. 
"The UN should play a more active role in fighting for the principles of international law, territorial integrity and sovereignty of internationally recognized states, UN member states, and the implementation of Resolution 1244," Serbian President Tomislav Nikolic said on Monday. 
According to Martin Nesirky, the spokesman for the UN secretary-general, the organisation will remain in its role of assisting both countries. 
"As the European Union steps forward in leading the international efforts in the region, this legacy needs to be preserved, and any "unfinished business" must be addressed through dialogue and peaceful means. The UN will continue to be a partner in assisting all communities in shaping their own future," Nesirky said. 
Thaci said that it would be impossible for the UN to join the technical dialogue, which was launched in March 2011. 
In Belgrade, Ban met with Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić and Prime Minister-designate Ivica Dacic. The UN chief said he was confident that "Serbia would make a full contribution to the work of the UN, especially in the year to follow, when Jeremić will chair the UN General Assembly." 
Dusan Janjic, co-ordinator of the Forum for Inter-ethnic Relations, said that Ban issued a clear message. 
"The General Assembly deals with global issues, not Serbian interests," Janjic told SETimes. He said that if Jeremić tries to push a domestic agenda on the world body, it would cause great damage to Serbia. 
In Kosovo, the basis for Ban's visit raised some questions. 
Belul Beqaj, a Kosovo university professor and political analyst, said the visit is only part of the historian's chronicles. "It does not have any essential effect -- the explanation for him coming to Kosovo [was linked to Resolution 1244], which became part of history long ago," Beqaj told SETimes. 
Ramadan Ilazi, co-founder of Kosovo's Fol (Speak up) Movement, said the visit is connected to the end of Kosovo's supervised independence. 
"[He] intends to find new modalities on the status and role of the UN in Kosovo. Kosovo needs UN support and the role of this organisation is indispensable in the process of the normalisation of the relations between Kosovo and Serbia …," Ilazi told SETimes. 
While in Kosovo, Ban will visit with members of UNMIK, as well as travel to the UNESCO World Heritage Site of the Serb Orthodox monastery of Visoki Dečani. 
