09/05/2012
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 09/05/12
The new Romanian government, headed by the Social-Democrat Party's Victor Ponta, has made reversing the austerity measures taken by the previous centre-right cabinets amid economic hardships the core priorities of its agenda. 
But analysts warn that the new executive has to keep a 5 billion-euro precautionary agreement with the IMF and the European Commission on track by avoiding measures that risk swelling the budget deficit. 
"This government cannot afford to make wrong gestures," Aurelian Dochia, an analyst for the Romanian Centre for Economic Policies, told SETimes. 
"The framework agreement with the IMF is essential and has to be observed. It would be a mistake on the part of the new government to pass populist measures, since the tripartite coalition that forms this cabinet stands high chances of winning the elections in November and then be forced to reap the results of such hasty moves." 
Ponta's cabinet announced it would increase the state employees' salaries, slashed by 25% in 2010, by 8% as of June and then by another 8% in December. 
"We have identified supplementary resources so that we can increase the budget deficit so that we can keep our promises concerning salaries and pensions," Florin Georgescu, the new finance minister, said last weekend at the end of a meeting with the IMF delegation. 
The IMF's delegation head, Jeffrey Franks, said on Wednesday (May 9th) that state employees' salaries can be brought to the mid-2010 level only as of next year. 
"The temptation is high. Populism has been a dominant note during electoral campaigns in Romania," Raluca Alexandrescu, a political science professor at the University of Bucharest, told SETimes. "But this government has a fragile budget to manage; therefore it should stay away from any electoral gifts." 
But representatives of the Social-Democrat Party (PSD), the main party of the left-leaning tripartite ruling coalition now in power, say bringing the salaries back to the level before the austerity drive is a moral obligation for the new government. 
"We have always said it: austerity measures cannot last more than a year," Constantin Nita, vice president of PSD, told SETimes. "Therefore, we cannot ask the population to sacrifice forever. So after austerity, the left has come now to apply measures to stimulate economic growth and mend social inequity." 
The ascension of the social-democrats coalition in Romania can hardly be put in the European trend of leftist parties taking over economically-stricken countries, the two analysts stress. 
"It is not the austerity measures that led to the fall of the previous government, but rather an effervescent opposition and a reconfiguration of the political forces in the Romanian Parliament," Alexandrescu said. "Let's bear in mind Ungureanu's government did not fall as a consequence of an electoral process, so only next elections in November can tell what the will of the people truly is." 
"I do not think the left is able to come with different answers to the economic crisis," Dochia said, "The left is not an alternative now for the Romanian society simply because here the left and the right have always taken turns in ruling and the differences between the two have been in fact blurred lately." 
At the other end, public employees are looking at the new government's priorities with suspicion. 
"Of course, a salary increase is good news to me. But I want to make sure this is a long-term decision," Andrei Stroe, a 37-year-old public financial administration accountant, told SETimes. 
"Since the risk of sliding back into recession is still out there, I do not want a new government late this year, after elections, to lean against the public sector again to mend an over-swollen public deficit." 
