24/06/2005
(Bloomberg, Reuters, Angus Reid Consultants, Sofia News Agency - 24/06/05; AFP, The Christian Science Monitor, FT, UPI, The Daily Telegraph, BNN, Sofia News Agency, BTA - 23/06/05; Alpha Research - 22/06/05)
With many voters frustrated about living standards and the continuing problem of corruption, Bulgarian Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg's chances of winning a second term appear slim. Polls indicate that the parliamentary elections on Saturday (25 June) will likely be won by a coalition led by the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP). But the make-up of parliament remains anyone's guess, in part because an unusually large number of parties have a chance of winning seats. 
As the campaigns drew to a close Thursday, many pollsters said it was the first time in the last 15 years they are so uncertain about the final outcome. 
Saturday's election is especially crucial because it comes only 18 months before the country's scheduled EU entry. Saxe-Coburg's National Movement for Simeon II (NMS-II) brought Bulgaria to the EU's doorstep -- as well as leading it into NATO -- and has kept it on a steady course of growth for more than three years. But Bulgaria remains one of the poorest countries in Europe, with an average monthly income below 210 euros. 
A survey by the MBMD polling agency from 16 June to 20 June showed that 34.6 per cent of decided voters would back the BSP on Saturday, with NMS-II coming second with 21.7 per cent -- about half the almost 43 per cent of support it won in the June 2001 elections. 
The ouster of the former king turned prime minister would be in line with what has become a tradition in the past 15 years. No government so far, regardless of its success, has won a second mandate. But Saturday's vote is likely to break another tradition. Typically, parliamentary elections are won by between three and five parties and coalitions. The latest polls, however, show that an unprecedented eight parties and coalitions stand a chance of surpassing the 4 per cent threshold for entry into the 240-seat assembly. 
Besides the BSP and the NMS-II, the other party sure to be represented in the next legislature is the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF), which is expected to win 9 per cent of the vote, according to the MBMD survey. Others expected to win seats include former Prime Minister Ivan Kostov's right-wing Democrats for Strong Bulgaria (DSB), with 7.4 per cent, and the newly-formed ultranationalist Ataka (Attack) coalition, which is polling around 7.2 per cent. For many, an entry into parliament of the anti-Roma and anti-Semitic Ataka would be the most alarming possible outcome Saturday. 
The two other right-wing coalitions, the United Democratic Forces (UtDF) and the Bulgarian People's Union (BPU), are likely to get 6.1 per cent and 6 per cent of the vote, respectively, according to the MBMD poll. 
A survey conducted by Alpha Research polling agency produced similar results, with only a different line-up for the parties and coalitions in the last five places. 
According to Andrey Raichev of the Gallup polling agency, the small New Time party also has a slight chance of landing representatives in the new parliament. 
"In no other election campaign have we been so unclear over the election results," MBMD head Mira Yanova remarked Thursday. 
What makes the outcome of Saturday's vote so unpredictable, pollsters explained, was the uncertainty concerning the distribution of the votes for the three right-wing political formations, whose leaders are all former members of the UDF. The party ruled the country between 1997 and 2001, but later split. 
On the basis of the results of the MBMD and Alpha Research polls, the BSP could win between 95 and 106 parliamentary seats, falling short of the outright majority needed to run the country on its own. The MRF, the junior partner in the incumbent NMS-II-led ruling coalition, has made it clear that it would readily join a government headed by the BSP. But depending on the final results of the vote, the two might need another partner. 
