23/08/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times -- 23/08/05
Albania faces a rising number of school dropouts, according to statistics from the Public Services Directorate. Over the last six months, the data shows, there has been a continuing increase in the rate of children leaving their studies behind in order to go to work and help support their families. Among other things, the data raises the concern that Albanian children are more than ever becoming exposed to the risks of human trafficking. 
"Out of the 4 per cent of the kids who don't go to the schools, nearly 72 per cent are working in the streets, selling different articles or washing the cars, and 15 per cent of them are begging in the streets," the study reads. 
To help address the problem, Tirana's City Hall has initiated a programme that offers social services, counselling, economic aid and healthcare for children and their families. The municipality is also working to integrate nearly 50 dropouts back into the educational system. Following negotiations with their parents and offers of financial help, nearly 32 children have agreed to go back to school. 
In co-operation with the non-profit organisation Kids of the World, the municipality also offers services for street kids and others who are not going to school. The programme involves the three elementary schools in the capital with the highest number of vulnerable children. The kids at these schools frequently come from families with low incomes and social problems. Many are from the Roma community. 
These schools have now established integrated classes, managed by two teachers of language and mathematics, while a social worker helps the children cope with economic problems, behavioural issues, school attendance and other areas of concern. Extra classes, including a variety of socio-cultural activities, have been set up. 
According to the international organisation World Vision, about 60 per cent of 15-year-olds surveyed in Albania do not attend school. "These children are the most at risk of being trafficked and sold into slavery," it says. 
The Albanian Statistics Institute has found that 32 per cent of children between the ages of six and 17 are engaged in some form of work, including begging, building and recycling refuse. Many of these children face steep odds in the race against malnutrition, poverty and poor quality schooling. 
