28/06/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 28/06/04
 Southeast European Times: What is the status of implementing the Framework Agreement requirement for inclusion of minorities in the Macedonian military?
 Vlado Buckovski: A new philosophy is being promoted in the country, and the defence ministry and the Macedonian Army are leading the effort. Should we succeed, Macedonian citizens -- regardless of ethnic origin -- will think of the ARM as the guarantor of security, and we will make a major breakthrough in what we see as one of the government's priorities: the strengthening of mutual understanding and confidence between Macedonian citizens, independent of ethnic affiliation.
The defence ministry is helping to foster stability, security and prosperity in Macedonia, and is committed to full implementation of the Framework Agreement. An important part of this effort is the recruitment of military staff from the ethnic communities living in the country. Professional soldiers from the ethnic Albanian community now account for 8 per cent of the ARM, compared to 1.5 per cent in 2002. This is a major breakthrough.
Through training courses and recruitment programmes, the process is continuing. The goal is to build an army of well-trained, highly professional and dedicated soldiers representing all the ethnic communities in Macedonia.
 SE Times: What are the obstacles to increasing the number of minorities in the military? What is the plan to overcome those hurdles?
 Buckovski: The defence ministry has prepared an action plan for adequate representation of ethnic communities in the ARM; this will be implemented by 2013. As early as 2007, we will have achieved the proper proportion of all ethnic communities in all categories -- with the exception of the officer staff, who must undergo a four-year education. We have achieved great progress in representation of the ethnic communities in the ARM and this progress will continue.
 SE Times: What are the reform priorities for the Macedonian Armed Forces?
 Buckovski: As part of the road towards NATO membership, Macedonia is willing to implement the reforms that are necessary to bring the overall army structure into line with established Euro-Atlantic standards. All political subjects and most citizens in the country support this agenda. A poll has shown that 72 per cent of Macedonians favour membership in NATO.
The defence ministry started the current year by launching a six-month programme of priority reforms. Among the priority items is completion of the third phase of the Strategic Defence Overview and its development into a transformation programme, which has already been given the go-ahead by the Macedonian Parliament. Another priority is streamlining army equipment and increasing the budget for modernisation. A project to dismantle technology that is outdated and too expensive to maintain has started. A system of year-long planning, programming and budgeting has been implemented through the Strategic Defence Overview. One of the key laws leading to conceptual change of the defence and security system is a bill on crisis management.
Training the members of a newly established border police has started. The interior ministry has taken over securing the Macedonian-Greek border, thus implementing the integrated border security strategy. Professionalisation of the ARM is continuing. The plan for dismantling inessential facilities -- barracks, army homes, restaurants -- as well as inessential activities will soon swing into full gear. Preparation of reform projects for the military hospital and military academy has been under way, and an action plan for the continuation of intensive regional co-operation, including co-operation between countries in the Adriatic Group, has been defined.
 SE Times: What specific actions are you taking to achieve these objectives?
 Buckovski: The Army Chief of Staff is prepared to implement the Strategic Defence Overview. President Branko Crvenkovski will approve a new army formation, and a new image for the army will be developed by 2007. Defence reforms are one of the government's top priorities. I assure you that we are committed to carrying through preparations for NATO membership because doing so is in the interest of Macedonia and the countries in the region, as well as our partners in NATO. Our firm determination and belief that NATO membership is Macedonia's essential objective is the driving force behind all those plans.
 SE Times: What is the role of the Adriatic Charter in the process of reform in the Macedonian armed forces?
 Buckovski: Major progress in regional security and defence co-operation has been made, especially by Macedonia, Albania and Croatia as part of the Adriatic Group. I believe the region has the capacity to lead all the countries in the region into a new era in which mutual co-operation and mutual understanding prevail. The magic circle in which the region has found itself should be a motivational factor for us and our neighbours. Macedonia supports efforts by Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia-Montenegro to join the Partnership for Peace programme. The Adriatic Group countries have declared that a joint unit will take part in a peacekeeping mission in Afghanistan, and the army chiefs of staff of the three countries are already preparing joint manoeuvres. All these activities are leading towards the formation of a mini regional security system that will strengthen the South NATO Command.
Macedonia has become a leader in efforts to stabilise the region. We are facing the challenge of echoing the success of the Baltic model. We are now focused on the Adriatic Group; there is intensive co-operation at the army level and more joint exercises are planned. We also intend to take part in the operation in Afghanistan together with our partners. One interesting project is to equip the Krivolak base in central Macedonia as a regional training centre. Another option is to establish a regional academy. Collective security arrangements can solve other regional security issues as well.
We have often discussed the fact that we want the mini-security system to be a part of a larger NATO security system. Our enhanced partnership with NATO, as well as the goals we have defined with our partners in Brussels within the Membership Action Plan, affect the stabilisation of the country and the region as well as the materialisation of Macedonia's ambitions for full membership in the North Atlantic Treaty.
 SE Times: What is Macedonia expecting from the NATO summit in Istanbul?
 Buckovski: The most recent meeting of the North Atlantic Council confirmed the progress of Macedonia's defence reforms and preparations for NATO membership. By approving the Strategic Defence Overview, Macedonia has taken a major step towards transformation of the army and implementation of NATO standards. We are expecting that the open door policy will continue and that the progress achieved will be emphasised at the summit. Macedonia is expecting an invitation by 2006 and a full NATO membership by 2007.
