30/07/2011
By Ozgur Ogret for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 30/07/2011
Istanbul's transportation sector relies on taxi cabs to get tourists and locals around the vast city. However, many drivers have tarnished the industry's reputation by regularly cheating customers. 
The most common scam is taking a longer route when a shorter one will do. Out-of-towners often fall victim to this scheme since they don't know the quickest routes. 
Some drivers even have two meters -- one for larger tires and another for smaller ones. By using the meter intended for smaller tires, the driver can trick the meter into thinking he has driven a longer distance. Similarities between Turkey's five and 50 lira bills also allow cab drivers to take advantage of foreigners. 
Rebecca Doffing, a US citizen living in Istanbul, has had more than her fair share of taxi scams. She recalls one taxi ride from Eminonu to Besiktas that cost her 60 lira when it should have cost closer to ten. 
"He fiddled with the meter and was charging me 20 lira. While I argued with him over that, he switched the 50 lira note I'd given him with a five lira note and argued that I'd not given him enough money. I was flustered and gave him another ten, not realizing he'd switched the bills until after I'd left the cab," she said. 
Her experiences with Turkish cab drivers have helped her wise up though. "I immediately let a taxi driver know that I speak Turkish, know where I'm going and know how to get there, even if I'm not quite sure. I also announce the amount I'm giving the driver as I hand it over." 
Concert promoter Burak Can reported that the band Blues Brothers once paid 50 lira to take a cab from Ortakoy to Sultanahmet in 2007. 
"When they complained of the long distance, the driver just commented that 'Istanbul is so big,'" he said. 
Foreigners are not the only ones that fall victim to cabdrivers' deceit. 
Emrah Aydoğdu was once conned out of 50 lira. The cab driver claimed he could not make change for Aydogdu's seven lira cab ride, gave him a 50 lira bill back, and asked him to get change from a nearby newsstand. 
"I left the taxi to get a pack of cigarettes and a newspaper. The seller examined the money and said 'man, this is money fake'. I looked behind me and the taxi was gone," he recalls. 
Acting president of the Istanbul Taxi Drivers’ Artisan Chamber, Ercan Akkopru, said that the chamber tries to follow every complaint. Most of their members are against such unfair practices, but the Chamber can't do much since the laws are insufficient on this matter. 
"We cannot even send [the drivers] to the disciplinary board. [They] need to be transferred to the Union of Artisan Chambers for this," he says. 
Passengers may take the matter to the police, but the trouble of doing this often outweighs the rewards. 
With 18,000 cabs in Istanbul, hundreds of thousands of drivers take turns driving them. Unqualified drivers or those in need of a second job can easily become taxi drivers because there is no government control. 
"We should do a better job keeping records of the taxi drivers," Akkopru said, adding that the Chamber is currently discussing this matter with the governor's office. 
