13/04/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 13/04/13
Incumbent Filip Vujanovic was declared the winner of last weekend's presidential election in Montenegro, but the narrow margin between Vujanovic and opponent Miodrag Lekic revealed the country's ongoing division. 
Citizens and analysts said this was the tightest election result in Montenegro's history, while the opposition claimed the winner was Lekic, who campaigned on a platform of reconciliation and reducing corruption. 
Montenegro's electoral commission announced on April 8th that Vujanovic of the Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) won 51.21 percent of the vote. Lekic, who was backed by the country's main opposition bloc, the Democratic Front, had 48.79 percent. 
"There was a lot of controversy in this election, and this is certainly the most speculative result so far," Svetozar Jovicevic, independent political analyst and former deputy prime minister, told SETimes. "Support for the ruling party is certainly melted due to the bad economic situation, falling foreign investment, and persistent allegations of cronyism and corruption. I think this support will continue to decline in the future, as the economic situation can hardly be fixed [before] the next elections." 
The president is largely a figurehead for Montenegro's 680,000 citizens, with real power vested in the prime minister, DPS leader Milo Djukanovic. After last year's parliamentary elections, Djukanovic became prime minister for the seventh time, the longest tenure of any prime minister in the Balkans. DPS candidates have won the presidency eight times since 1990. 
DPS received 45.6 percent of the votes in the 2012 parliamentary elections, its lowest percentage since 2001 (42.04 percent). The party received 51.94 percent in the 2009 parliamentary elections. 
Milan Vratnica, 31, a mechanical engineer from Podgorica, said the close result of the presidential election is further proof that voters' opinions are changing. 
"There are simply too many problems and political scandals -- suspicious privatisations, spending public money, unemployment, corruption -- you name it. People have had enough and therefore the ruling [politicians] are losing the support of the citizens. I think that whoever comes to confront them on the next elections will win," Vratnica told SETimes. 
During the campaign, Lekic spoke of a plan for "national cohesion," advocating reconciliation between Montenegrins and Serbs. He also supported strengthening the fight against the mafia and corruption, engaging young people in politics, reviving the economy and improving the rule of law. 
Vujanovic focused on the DPS core issues of Montenegro's path toward NATO and the EU. 
The Democratic Front vowed to contest the election results. 
"Not at any price will we allow them to take away our victory, nor will we recognise any institution that accepts a Vujanovic victory," the Democratic Front said in a statement, adding that it would freeze participation in all parliamentary working groups, a possible prelude to a full boycott of the assembly. 
DPS is satisfied with the result even though its minor coalition partner, the Social Democratic Party, refused to support Vujanovic in the election. 
"This win can serve as a proof that Montenegro is on the right track, and that track is the European Union and NATO," Halil Dukovic, member of the DPS presidency, told SETimes. 
"Although our coalition partner was against Vujanovic, it will not disrupt relations in the ruling coalition because we have a higher purpose, and that purpose is called Montenegro. I don't want to comment on allegations of the opposition, because they always tell the same story after they lose elections." 
Montenegro started the long process of membership talks with the EU in July 2012. The country also has NATO candidate status, and government officials are hoping for NATO membership within the next two years. The presidential election was the country's second since it proclaimed independence from Serbia in 2006. 
 Which priorities would you like to see Montenegro's ruling party focus? Tell us in the comments.  
