20/05/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Ohrid -- 20/05/13
Roza Mojsoska from Macedonia and Bojko Gasperut from Slovenia live with disabilities, but they have not let that stop them from expressing themselves artistically. Their work can be found in the cabinets of many politicians, presidents and prime ministers around the world. 
Mojsoska and Gasperut paint by holding the brush in their mouths. They said they want to send a message of peace and tolerance through their art, and show the world that citizens of the Balkans are full of love and understanding. 
The two participated in last month's international art colony in Ohrid, which included dozens of artists with disabilities from all over the region. 
Mojsovska, who has painted with her mouth since she was 7, told SETimes she wants to show that people with disabilities can work and express their creativity just as any able-bodied person. 
"I draw with my mouth because my legs and arms are immobile. My pieces are representing the life, and I am inspired by the Holy Bible. … I want to give love and to show that we have love within ourselves and that we feel, and hope for better tomorrow," Mojsovska said, adding that people of the Balkans should try live with each other, and not beside each other. 
Of the works she has given to world leaders, she said her favorite went to the late Pope John Paul II, a picture of a flower, which she said is a symbol of love and peace. 
"Socialising with artists from the Balkans is proof that we can co-operate with each other," Mojsovska said. "We are trying to be together and every day towards that goal we move a little bit closer, although it is difficult. We are trying to overcome all the obstacles that exist among the people, and through the pictures we are trying to send messages from life." 
Gasperat said he has been drawing with his mouth since 1969. He has had 110 solo exhibits and has participated in 400 group exhibits around the world. 
"As more as possible, people should see our work and that is our goal … to send messages of love and peace among the people. We should love each other, to give love, and not hatred. Racial and religious differences should not be a reason not to co-operate, all of us who live in the Balkans," Gasperat told SETimes. 
Gasperat said his paintings are filled with cheerful colors and a message of co-operation and good will among all people. 
"Happiness is when you have a good friend or neighbour, and that is what we need in the Balkans. We should stick together the way we used to," he said. 
Branimir Jovanovski, a Macedonian who won a gold medal in the men's air pistol competition at the 1992 Paralympic Games in Barcelona and president of Mobility Macedonia, told SETimes that persons with disabilities from the Balkans want to show that there are good things happening in the region. 
"The Balkans is a place where we are born, where our ancestors have lived, and where our generations will live, and it is very logical that we want to leave a stamp on the political, economical and social life in the world. That perception that the world has for us that we are risky and war territory is incorrect." 
Works produced at the art colony in Ohrid will be shown at a few international exhibits, including on December 3rd, the World Day for People With Disabilities. Similar art colonies will be held later this year in Novi Knezevac, Serbia, and in Slovenia. 
Sofka Krceva, general secretary of the National Association of People with Disabilities in Macedonia, said the events are an indication that the region can rise above past conflicts and prejudices. 
"Proof for that is the co-operation between organizations from all around former Yugoslavia," Krceva told SETimes. "The socializing and co-operation will exist besides the differences in the political turmoil and disagreements between the neighbours in the Balkans. The co-operation between these organisations is a good example for all in this territory." 
Have you participated in regional events aimed at promoting peace and unity in the Balkans? Share your experiences in the comments section. 
