02/03/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 02/03/06
After five years in opposition, Social Democratic Union (SNSD) leader Milorad Dodik has again become prime minister of Republika Srpska (RS). The entity's new government was elected on Tuesday (28 February) by a slim margin. MPs from the former ruling Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) left the parliament session before the vote. 
Approval of the cabinet depended on votes from the Party of Democratic Progress (PDP), whose leader is Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic, and two Bosniak parties -- the Party of Democratic Action and Party for Bosnia and Herzegovina. In return for their backing, they were given ministerial positions. The top cabinet posts, however, including the finance and police ministries, went to SNSD members. 
As the constitution requires, eight ministers are Serbs, five of them are Bosniaks, and three are Croats. 
Dodik has said his priorities will be the fight against organised crime and corruption, and reform of the privatisation process. "Our task is to make RS institutions stronger, to bring back the citizens' trust in those institutions, and to show they are capable of fighting economic and social violence," said Dodik. The first move of the RS government in the next few days will be to adopt the RS budget for this year. 
Addressing parliament, Dodik stressed that co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal is a clear obligation. He pledged to ensure stability so that BiH could continue on its road to Europe. 
Trade unions and employers' associations have expressed support for the new government's programme. "We will press the government and the parliament to uphold the law, which will ensure those who do not respect the law end up in prison. All of those who have been stealing off the companies and firing their workers must take responsibility," said trade union president Ranka Misic. 
Analysts say the Social Democrats are taking a risk by assuming control of the government just seven months before elections. Dodik is expected to concentrate on taking concrete steps that will immediately lead to positive effects, boosting his support in the polls. 
Special attention already has been focused on Dodik's plan for RS to form an investment bank that would directly support the economy, companies and undeveloped areas. 
