21/06/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 21/06/11
Tola, an Albanian language teacher and her husband, Gramoz, a police officer, left Albania in 1999 and settled in Greece to build a life there. "We could clearly see it was difficult to buy a house and we would have to pay the loan all our life," Tola tells SETimes. 
They were not alone in their thinking. Statistically, Greece and Italy host the largest populations of Albanian expatriates. 
The young woman says life in Greece was not easy. However, they worked hard and managed to save money and buy an apartment. Tola gave birth to her two children in Greece, sending both to private kindergartens while she and her husband worked day and night to save money. "We got used to this kind of living, and nothing would distract us. All we wanted was to save money," Tola says. 
The couple and their two children came back to Tirana in 2005 and bought an apartment. "We tried to find jobs here, but things in Tirana had changed so much that we felt like foreigners. We went back to Greece to work more, save more money to be able to buy a shop and run a small business. We realised this was the only way to have a future in Albania," Gramoz tells SETimes. 
They went back to the same routine and put money in the bank, until one day, people "started whispering that a big crisis was about to come". 
"I was really upset when I heard those rumours. Signs of the crisis started to become evident soon. Gramoz would not get his pay and many workers were left jobless. All we would get was 70 euros per week of my salary." 
She adds, "We started using money from our savings, something that had never happened before. We discussed and decided to come back to Albania. Life in Greece had become difficult. We came back to Albania in July 2009, without the money we had been striving to collect to buy a shop here." 
Her husband ended up returning to Greece. "We registered in the work offices as emigrants who had returned home, but no change. Our savings were running down," Gramoz says. 
"We decided to start a small business, an internet cafe, and to look for jobs at the same time. We found a place and started working at eight in the morning and close after midnight. All we get is enough money to feed the children," Tola adds. 
The Albanian government admits the remittances from Albanian emigrants in Greece have dropped, but says the country is not experiencing the negative effects it feared. 
"On the contrary, thousands of Albanians have returned. They have brought the money they saved in Greece and have started to invest in small businesses. This is a great victory for Albania. People who have learned a lot abroad, return and build something new here," Prime Minister Sali Berisha told the Austrian newspaper Kurir in an interview this month. 
But the Albanian opposition disagrees. Socialist Party deputy Ervin Koci told the Albanian daily Mapo that Greece's crisis has negatively affected the Albanian economy. 
"If we think first of all that Albanian emigrants would return to the country, starting small businesses here, which would help the Albanian economy grow, this is too beautiful to believe. No economist can say that, considering the domestic market," Koci told the daily on June 20th. 
Despite the contradictory opinions among politicians, Albanian emigrants keep coming back, some to settle permanently, others waiting for better times to return to Greece. 
