29/11/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 19/11/04
The numbers are frightening. The latest update from the UN Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the World Health Organisation (WHO) -- pegged to World AIDS Day on 1 December -- shows that, on average, 1.7 per cent of men aged 19 to 24 in Eastern Europe and Central Asia are infected with HIV. That’s almost two out of every 100 men. According to UNAIDS/WHO, the incidence of HIV is rising faster in Eastern Europe, particularly in Russia, than anywhere else in the world. 
But there’s some good news: HIV infection rates in the countries of Southeast Europe are quite low compared to the larger region. Governments should be paying attention now, officials say, in order to prevent the disease from spreading from marginalised groups -- people who inject drugs and commercial sex workers -- to the wider, mainstream population. 
"Even if the numbers are small, and there seems like there's no reason to worry, if I were governments in Southeast Europe, I would be extremely cautious," said UNAIDS Europe regional co-ordinator Henning Mikkelsen. 
Given the transitional nature of all the countries -- and in the case of the former Yugoslavia, the 1990s conflicts and their aftermath -- the potential for an epidemic is there, Mikkelsen said. Young people here are especially vulnerable to engaging in what AIDS officials term "risk behaviours", which include using drugs and having unsafe sex. 
"I would say that what is driving the epidemic is really the young people in the region. This is a young people's epidemic," he said. Mikkelsen pointed out that people under age 29 make up 30 per cent of HIV/AIDS cases in Western Europe, but in Eastern Europe that figure is 80 per cent. 
"It's an indicator of how young people have been affected by the process of social transition. There are great opportunities for travel and so on, but it's also opened up a world of uncertainty with high unemployment and more uncertainty about their futures. Young people always experiment, but in this case they have to experiment to figure out how to live their lives. Injecting drug use is so common and widespread among young people there. Most of them also have high levels of unsafe sex, and that is the situation that makes it really explosive," he said. 
Mikkelsen said the governments were starting to take the problem seriously, and that in recent years many of them have developed national AIDS commissions and strategic plans to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS, while also launching public campaigns -- such as the Stop AIDS campaign in Bosnia and Herzegovina -- to inform and educate people about the disease. 
"This is very encouraging," he said. "Romania, for example, has acknowledged the situation there and they are now scaling up dramatically HIV prevention activities for young people. I hope that Southeast Europe can become a model on how you stop things from happening -- early." 
Romania is one country in the region that stands out in its response to its unique HIV/AIDS epidemic. In the late 1980s, thousands of children in Romania were infected with HIV through unscreened blood transfusions or in hospitals that used unsterilised needles. These children, now adolescents, make up 7,500 of Romania's 10,500 cases. The government now provides anti-retroviral therapy -- a cocktail of drugs that keep HIV from developing into AIDS, and in some cases diminish HIV antibodies in the bloodstream to very low levels -- to everyone living with the disease, for free. 
Tania Goldner, UNICEF health and nutrition officer in Bucharest, said it was a "huge financial effort" for the government. 
"Last year they spent about $25m just for anti-retroviral treatment," she said. "You can imagine the pressure on the government to assure the treatment for these people -- children who were infected by the health system itself." 
The Romanian government has also received money from the Global Fund to focus on prevention efforts. With UNICEF’s help, it has introduced a pilot health education project in one-third of the country’s schools. Among other things, students receive accurate information about HIV/AIDS and drug use. 
"The pilot project is going very well -- each year we’ve seen an increase in requests for it, and increased interest in the school systems to participate in it, even though it's not mandatory," Goldner said. 
UNICEF is among the several international organisations that are supporting the regions' governments. The World Bank is also involved, because the countries' economic and structural problems, such as high unemployment and inadequate health care, increase the risk of a wider HIV/AIDS epidemic. 
"If you have 50 or 60 per cent unemployment, as opposed to 10 per cent or 5 per cent, it's clear where the risk is much higher," said Nedim Jaganjac, a Washington-based World Bank health specialist for the Europe and Central Asia region. "A person who is employed, who has insurance, who’s relatively well-off, is at lower risk for HIV than those guys who are marginalised, unemployed, less educated and so on." 
Another recent addition to the fight against HIV/AIDS is the Global Fund for AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. Since the Fund -- established by the UN and G8 countries and supported with donations from 70 governments, foundations and corporations -- gave its first grant in 2002, it has committed $3 billion in 128 countries. 
Countries applying to the Fund have set up "country co-ordinating mechanisms" to draw the grant applications and select projects. Money is sent to a principal recipient that's responsible for accounting, reporting to the Fund and disbursing money to the organisations doing the projects. 
Countries in the region that have received two-year Global Fund grants for HIV/AIDS include Bulgaria (US$6.9m), Romania (US$21.8m), Macedonia (US$4.3m), Turkey (US$4m), Serbia ($2.7m) and Croatia ($3.3m). The HIV/AIDS programmes in these countries are focused almost exclusively on prevention. 
The sums are small compared to the amounts the Fund disburses to African countries that have been devastated by HIV/AIDS (for example, Uganda has been approved for a two-year, $201m grant for all three diseases). That in itself shows why it is crucial to take steps in the Balkans while the problem there is still manageable, Fund representatives say. 
The epidemic in Southeast Europe is "at a very, very low scale," says Urban Weber, the Global Fund’s team leader for Eastern Europe and Central Asia. "However the ingredients are there to allow a spread of the epidemic. By addressing these prevention needs now, the HIV epidemic can be kept where it is, and this is at a very low level." 
