10/11/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/11/04
A conference held in Belgrade last month brought together experts and political analysts to discuss war crimes in the former Yugoslavia and what needs to be done to foster reconciliation. 
Called "Truth and Reconciliation -- Where Are We Now and Where Are We Going?", the event was organised by the Victimology Society of Serbia (VDS) and Germany's Friedrich Ebert Foundation. Its focus was on humanising the victims of war crimes and uncovering the truth behind crimes committed. 
"There is no patriotism or state explanation which justifies the covering up of crimes such as the one that took place in Srebrenica," Serbian President Boris Tadic said in his introductory speech to the conference. "On occasions such as this one, frequent words are 'honour and pleasure'. It is no pleasure to have the honour to open a conference like this one -- it would have been better had there not been any reason for a conference of this kind." 
The president also said he is horrified by the possibility that war criminals could be walking the streets freely. 
Croatian Ambassador to Serbia-Montenegro Tonci Stanicic stressed that reconciliation is the obligation of all states in the region. Addressing conference participants, Stanicic said reconciliation efforts should focus on establishing the truth of what exactly happened. 
Many participants pointed to Serbia's volatile political situation as an obstacle to the process. "Contradictory and confusing messages sent by Serbian authorities are amplified by confusing messages in the media, and together they contribute to constant baffling of the people and the lack of any possibility for facing and searching for the truth," said VDS member Vesna Nikolic Ristanovic. 
Meanwhile, Goran Bozicevic of the Miramida Centre in Croatia said his country has yet to confront its own wartime legacy in a systematic way. However, he added, "The constant strengthening of the independent media and the judiciary, coupled with constant efforts on both levels -- the personal and the public -- raises hopes." 
Alma Masic, a representative of the International Committee for Missing Persons in Bosnia and Herzegovina, said international institutions, NGOs and individuals are spearheading the truth and reconciliation process in her country and throughout the region. 
Participants called for ways to empower citizens in holding governments accountable. Such developments, they said, should take place on a country-by-country basis, as well as across the region. 
