29/09/2004
(Independent - 29/09/04; AP, Reuters, VOA, Radio B92, Tanjug - 28/09/04)
Facing mounting international pressure to meet its obligations to the UN war crimes tribunal, Serbia has reportedly stepped up the hunt for one of The Hague-based court's most wanted indictees. 
Speaking on condition of anonymity, a senior Serbian security officer told AP on Tuesday (28 September) that a massive search operation for former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic was ongoing. 
The operation, involving Serbian anti-terrorist police and a team of Western experts, was launched following orders for the fugitive's arrest and intelligence tips from US and other sources, the officer said. 
Police, however, would not confirm the search and said no unusual activities were registered that day. 
Mladic reportedly owns a small house in the village of Bobova, about 20km from Valjevo, and is widely believed to stay there during the summer. 
"The noose is tightening around Mladic," the Serbian officer said. Meanwhile, an unnamed senior US diplomat said to be familiar with the operation voiced optimism that "Mladic will soon be arrested." 
In 1995, the UN war crimes tribunal indicted Mladic and former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic for their roles in the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Both have been charged with genocide in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre -- in which as many as 8,000 Muslim boys and men were killed -- and the siege of Sarajevo. 
The tribunal's chief prosecutor, Carla del Ponte, has repeatedly insisted that Mladic is hiding in Serbia. Belgrade has been denying it. However, authorities there face increasing international pressure to hand over Mladic and 15 other indictees -- a key condition for Serbia-Montenegro's Euro-Atlantic integration. 
Rumours have been circulating that the United States has set a 1 October deadline for Serbia to co-operate or face suspension of $100m in US financial assistance. The British daily Independent reported Wednesday that Washington would also block Serbia's access to funding from international financial institutions. 
US Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes Issues Pierre-Richard Prosper denied claims of a specific deadline, saying instead that co-operation was past due. 
"I think that the reality is that Belgrade needed to co-operate yesterday," Prosper said at The Hague on Tuesday. "That is where we are and now the world is losing patience." 
After talks with del Ponte and the UN court's president, Theodor Meron, US officials also warned that Belgrade risks losing Washington's support for its bid to have alleged war criminals tried in local courts. 
"For there to be domestic trials there has to be first co-operation with the tribunal and that is the arrest of Mladic and other senior persons," Prosper said, adding that it might be time to review the UN-supported plan for ending the tribunal's activities in 2010 and extend its mandate beyond that date 
