25/01/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 25/01/10
The Serbian Orthodox Church formally enthroned its new patriarch during a ceremony Saturday (January 23rd). 
The bishop of Nis, Irinej Gavrilovic, follows Patriarch Pavle, who died on November 15th 2009. The new patriarch was elected Friday at an assembly of the Serbian Orthodox Church Synod. The election was conducted through the so-called "apostle vote". 
An envelope holding the name of the new patriarch was drawn from the Book of Gospel. The Book held envelopes containing the names of the three candidates with the biggest number of votes from Synod members. The drawing symbolises the name being chosen by the Holy Spirit. 
Bishop of Montenegro and the Coast Amfilohije and Bishop of Backa Irinej were the other two names in the Book. 
The 45th Serbian Orthodox Church Patriarch Irinej Gavrilovic was born in the village of Vidovo, near the western Serbian town of Cacak, in 1930. After graduating from high school, he proceeded to graduate from the Faculty of Theology in Prizren and the Faculty of Theology in Belgrade. 
He became a monk at the Rakovica monastery in 1959 and was given the name Irinej. In October that same year, he was officially made an archmonk at the Ruzica church in Belgrade. 
 Irinej became the head of the Monastic School in Ostrog in 1969. From that post he was appointed diocesan bishop of then Patriarch German, with the title of Bishop of Moravica, in 1974. A year later he was appointed bishop of Nis. 
The church plans to hold another inaugural ceremony at the Patriarchy in Pec, Kosovo, but has not set the date. 
"We should go to Pec, to our holy land of Kosovo, because that is where the inauguration should be completed. The question is -- will we be able to do it," Patriarch Irinej said after the inauguration. 
He said that one of the most important tasks of the Serbian Orthodox Church is to aid the state in ensuring Kosovo remains a part of Serbia. 
"Kosovo is our holy land, our Jerusalem. Serbia without Kosovo is not Serbia. Serbia without Kosovo is bereft of its soul," the patriarch said. 
He added he is aware of the weight of the honour given to him, an honour that, as he put it, also demanded sacrifice. 
"I call on everyone to join forces and bear the cross together," Patriarch Irinej said, adding that he had no special programme to carry out while at the church helm, rather that his programme would be the Gospel. 
"The newly-elected patriarch favours dialogue within the church and with the society and is open to other Christians. His election is a very good solution at this time for the Serbian Orthodox Church," analyst Zivica Tucic told journalists. 
