10/11/2005
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 10/11/05
The oil refinery at Bosanski Brod, located at Bosnia and Herzegovina's border with Croatia, has processed no crude oil for months. Insufficient funds and debts exceeding 100m euros have interfered with normal functioning of the mostly state-run enterprise. The refinery has the capacity to process 1.5 million tonnes of crude oil per year, but is struggling to find a niche in a crowded and increasingly competitive environment. 
To prevent a total collapse, the Republika Srpska (RS) government has decided to form a consortium with a private firm. Any company that has reported at least $350m in income over the last two business years is invited to submit their bid by the end of November. The new partner will get a 50 per cent share, with the possibility of eventually obtaining a majority share. 
So far, no offer has been submitted. However, ten companies -- mostly oil companies from Great Britain, Austria, Romania and Serbia -- have signaled interest. Among them is the UK-based firm Vitol, which had an exclusive right to process crude petroleum for its own needs in Oil Refinery Bosanski Brod for the last two years. 
However, RS authorities say the experience so far with Vitol has not been satisfactory. They complain that the refinery was shut down after only a brief engagement over the summer, putting some 1,400 workers in limbo. The authorities have since been in negotiations with the workers over back wages and demands for a long-term solution. 
Local analysts say that Bosanski Brod is being squeezed out by nearby competitors, particularly the Croatian company INA, owned by Hungary's Mole. INA is now the biggest importer of fuel in BiH, covering half the domestic market of oil products at the moment. 
Over the past five years, domestic production has been continually falling, while BiH's reliance on imports has increased. With neighbouring Serbia also boasting a major refinery, the Balkan market simply has too many players. 
