18/06/2013
By Igor Jovanovic and Linda Karadaku for the Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 18/06/13
An amnesty law at the centre of the talks between Pristina and Belgrade on implementing the Brussels agreement was passed by Kosovo's parliamentary legislative commission, and is expected to be approved by parliament. 
"The law addresses amnesty issues for all [Kosovo] citizens, without distinction to ethnicity and territory. The approval of this law requires a political and institutional consensus," Kosovo Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuci, who also runs the justice ministry, said of the legislation that was approved by the commission on Monday (June 17th). 
The law would absolve members of the Serbian judicial and security institutions, which will be integrated into the Kosovo system as part of the future community of Serb municipalities, in line with the Brussels agreement. 
Absent the law, Pristina authorities can arrest any Serb who has ever worked in any Serbian institution in Kosovo, according to Oliver Ivanovic, former state secretary in the Serbian Ministry for Kosovo. 
"Without a precisely written law, Pristina could arrest people simply because they have worked in Serbian courts or police, with the explanation that they were working contrary to the Kosovo constitution. We cannot allow that," Ivanovic told SETimes. 
Legal experts said an amnesty law is necessary because it is an international standard. 
"The desire to extend sovereignty and the functioning of the constitution in the north means the amnesty should include that part as well even though it will be unfavourable because of the Serbs' actions for 13 years," Luz Balaj, a lawyer at the Institute for Constitutional and Parliamentary Studies, told SETimes. 
Serbian courts and police in Kosovo will not be disbanded until all preconditions are met, Aleksandar Vulin, director the Serbia's Office for Kosovo and Metohija, said. 
"This [situation] makes an amnesty law necessary where Serbs in Kosovo will not be apprehended and arrested just because they are taking their country's side, and believe in its laws and government," Vulin told B92. 
Kuci said on June 10th that part of the security structures operating in the north will join the Kosovo institutions. 
"There is no room for 800 members, but some 150 members will be part of the institutions of Kosovo," Kuci said. 
Vulin said statements by officials specifying there will not be jobs for a number of Serbs in Kosovo's institutions once the Serbian institutions in Kosovo are closed, are threats intended to make them leave Kosovo. 
"Serbia finds the idea about the loss of jobs and, consequently, the announcement and threats of eviction, absolutely unacceptable," Vulin said. 
Fatmir Xhelili, a member of the Kosovo parliamentary commission for internal issues, security and supervision of the Kosovo Security Force, told SETimes that the concerns expressed by Serb officials are not real. 
"We do not see it as a real concern, it is more a form of a pressure to make us include them all in our security structures. We cannot accept them all … there are some limitations," Xhelili said. 
Xhelili said that every state makes its own calculations for the number of the police it needs and Kosovo, he added, has done that based on European parameters. 
"We will … try to include those members in Kosovo police, but we need precise information first on how many of them [there are]," he said. 
What should the international community do to ensure the Brussels agreement will be implemented? Share your opinion in the comments space.  
