17/11/2008
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 17/11/08
Fetija Demirovska and Agim Kariman are among 198 Roma teenagers who graduated from high school last month, with financial help from USAID and the Foundation Open Society Institute-Macedonia (FOSIM). They say the diploma will change their lives for the better. 
"I'm really glad that I finished my high school education and that I'll continue to educate myself because I'm registered in the department of social work of the philosophy faculty at the University of Skopje," Demirovska said. 
The assistance that helped her achieve this goal came through a joint programme that began in 2004. All candidates receive an annual scholarship of 481 euros, as well as academic assistance from mentors who help them master their subjects. 
Of those who graduated with Demirovska, 47 finished three years of high school, and the remainder completed four. From the latter group, 65 went on to enrol in Macedonian universities. 
Many Roma children, especially girls, drop out of school, Demirovska says. Some even fail to complete elementary school. "We Romas live in a conservative environment, and if some of us don't have parental support, then it is difficult to finish school," she explains. 
Kariman, now enrolled in the medical faculty of the University of Skopje, says that, classroom learning aside, he and his friends acquired new friends and learned how to build friendships. "I think the USAID and FOSIM help will change my life," he said. 
The new graduates received congratulations from US Ambassador to Macedonia Philip Reeker, Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski and FOSIM Director Vladimir Milcin at the graduation ceremony last month. 
Reeker praised the joint project, saying it would help break the "cycle of poverty and exclusion" afflicting the Roma. He commented USAID had "decided to invest in the education of a new group of 120 Roma students currently in 11th grade" and held out hope of celebrating their graduation in two years' time. 
Crvenkovski expressed concern that "almost half of the Roma people leave elementary school prematurely" but added, "I hope that this example will inspire other Roma pupils." 
Milcin said, "We are creating human capital. We are investing in you. I hope you will invest in your country." 
