26/10/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 26/10/10 
Serbia's membership application has been forwarded to the European Commission (EC), ten months after Belgrade officials submitted it. The EU Council of Ministers decided at its meeting in Luxembourg on Monday (October 25th) that Belgrade is ready to take a step closer to membership. 
 Further progress, however, will depend on full co-operation with the ICTY. 
The Netherlands, which has opposed further progress towards Serbian accession until all ICTY obligations are met, decided not to stand in the way. The country had previously requested that the EU hold off on forwarding Belgrade's application until Serbia arrests and extradites the two remaining indictees, Ratko Mladic and Goran Hadzic. 
The Dutch eased their stance on condition that each new step in the integration process is made subject to the unanimous agreement of all EU members. 
 "Today's decision is an expression of the EU's strong support to Serbia and its leaders. This support corresponds with equally great expectations," EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele said in a statement. While co-operation with the tribunal remains the key condition, he said, good neighbourly relations and regional co-operation are also significant factors. 
"Serbia has already taken many important steps towards its neighbors. We hope that we will witness its constructive engagement, in the spirit of Europe, in the upcoming dialog with Kosovo," Fuele said. 
Serbia's recent decision to work together with the EU in proposing a new UN General Assembly resolution on Kosovo helped pave the way for the green-lighting of its EU application, as did its readiness to hold talks with Pristina. 
"The Serbian path to the EU is unstoppable," said Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac. Serbia has the will to wrap up co-operation with the ICTY and the remaining indictees will be arrested as soon as they are located, he added. 
Deputy Prime Minister for European Integration Bozidar Djelic voiced the same readiness. "We will do everything, regardless of the conditions set by the EU, to find Mladic and have him answer for what he is charged with. That is one of the conditions for reconciliation," Djelic said. 
Political analyst Dejan Vuk Stankovic told SETimes that the EU's decision provides "wind in the sails" for pro-European parties in Belgrade, which were coming under pressure from the opposition for allegedly making too many compromises and having little to show in return. 
The Democratic Party of Serbia continued to mount such attacks even after Monday's decision, saying Serbia had "received a small reward for great concessions regarding Kosovo". 
Members of the public who spoke with SETimes said they are waiting for concrete results. 
"I will not rejoice before we start having a better life. Now we have a long way to go till we become members," said Lazar, a 35-year-old baker. "I was happy when the visas were annulled, but what good is that to me when I don't have enough money to travel?" 
