05/07/2010
By H.K. Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 05/07/10 Photos by Alexandros Beltes 
The Acropolis, the rock outcrop that features the Parthenon and other ancient temples representing classical antiquity, is Greece's most popular tourist attraction. Well over a million people visit it annually together with the adjacent New Acropolis Museum that opened in June 2009. 
Within walking distance are other very popular sites, including the Herod Atticus Odeon, the Agora, Roman Forum and the Temple of the Olympian Zeus archaeological site. Day-travelers or organised tour groups, however, rarely venture farther afield. 
 Numismatic Museum  
Most visitors to Athens will find themselves in Syntagma (Constitution) square at some point, the sprawling metropolis' central plaza. Syntagma faces parliament and the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier, while Athens' biggest metro terminal of the same name is located underneath the square. 
A favourite stroll lies between parliament and a triptych of 19th century neo-classical landmarks: the Athens Academy, the University of Athens' first building Propylaea and the National Library. 
Almost halfway between parliament and the Athens Academy is the stately mansion of the legendary 19th century merchant-cum-archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann, renowned for excavating Troy and the cities of Mycaene and Tiryns. Today, Schliemann's residence Iliou Melathron (Palace of Ilium) houses Greece's Numismatic Museum. 
This museum is a must-see for coin aficionados -- it hosts permanent and temporary exhibitions showcasing the Classical, Hellenistic, Roman, medieval and Byzantine periods. Additionally, rare coins from the Near East, Egypt and even Islamic kingdoms are on display. The mansion's outdoor garden offers a verdant respite on a hot summer day of sightseeing. Architecture buffs should take note that the building was designed by the "father" of neo-classical design and architecture in modern Greece, German architect Ernst Ziller. 
 City of Athens Museum  
Nearly 300m from the Schliemann Mansion in Klathmonos Square is another example of early neo-classical architecture, the City of Athens Museum. This small, pleasant museum is devoted exclusively to Athens' modern history, particularly of the past two centuries. It boasts an interior courtyard, stately desks and heirlooms belonging to past royal dynasties. A painting showing the Parthenon before a shell exploded during the 1687 Venetian siege of an Ottoman garrison is also on display. 
 Jewish Museum of Greece  
A true gem is the Jewish Museum of Greece, located on Nikis street within walking distance from the Acropolis attractions, opposite the national gardens and parliament. 
This small but multi-level museum is a state-of-the-art facility chronicling the almost 2,500-year-old history of Jews in Greece. Its stunning collections and artefacts include both those of the Romaniotes -- Greek-speaking Jews whose presence dates back millenia -- and the Sephardic community of Ladino-speakers exiled from the Iberian Peninsula in the 15th century. The latter was one of the most vibrant communities in Thessaloniki prior to the Holocaust. 
 Goulandris Natural History Museum Gaia Centre 
The leafy and upscale northern Athens suburb of Kifissia is home to the Gouladris Foundation's Gaia Centre. An ultra-modern facility, it showcases the natural sciences and the evolution of the planets. 
Gaia is a popular site for school groups of all ages, but it also offers another specific attraction -- a face from antiquity called Myrtis. 
The exhibit "Myrtis: Face to Face with the Past" is based on the reconstruction by scientists of a pre-pubescent Athenian girl who lived in Athens in the 5th century BC. She was a plague victim who died in Spartan-besieged Athens. The ancient Athenian statesman Pericles, and almost one-third of Athens' residents, were also victims of the plague. 
The girl's remains were discovered in the mid-1990s in a mass grave while the Kerameikos metro station was being built. Re-creations of clothing and hair designs of the day have been added. 
As of June 15th, the exhibit is touring other museums around the world. 
 Vravrona  
The ruins of the sanctuary of the goddess Artemis, located on the shores of a small eastern Attica bay in the greater Athens area, are archetypical of something you'd find in a 1970s-era tourism poster of Greece: ancient columns nestled between semi-arid and pine-covered Mediterranean hillsides, a blue sky and tranquil, azure-coloured waters. The Vravrona Museum, renovated and re-dedicated in 2009, is located on the other side of the hill from the actual archaeological site. 
This is a spectacular yet infrequently visited archaic and Classical site, easily toured within an hour's time and only a few kilometres north from very accessible, clean and picturesque beaches. It's roughly 35km from central Athens. If traveling without a car, the site can be reached by inter-city bus from the nearby town of Markopoulo, or, if a 1,5km distance doesn't deter the faint hearted, via a regular bus line from Athens proper. 
 Eleusis 
The Eleusis Museum and archaeological site easily ranks as amongst the most under-rated cultural attractions in the greater Athens area, given that the significant city-state of antiquity today lies right in the middle of Greece's most industrialised district. West of Athens proper, Eleusis (Elefsina in the modern vernacular) was the starting point of the Iera Odos (Sacred Way) that connected Eleusis with ancient Athens to the east, and was also the home of the cryptic and pre-eminent Eleusinian Mysteries. 
Today's archaeological site is large and sprawling, littered with fallen columns, reliefs, marble wells and even statues; the museum is just as impressive, with originals and replicas of the very significant site on display. Modern-day Elefsina is located 20km from Athens and is easily reachable by car and bus, both the inter-city variety and even urban transport from greater Athens. 
