06/05/2010
By Zlatko Kovach for Southeast European Times -- 06/05/10
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is spending hundreds of millions of euros on cash transfers to individuals, via social and veterans' benefits. In the Federation of BiH (FBiH) alone, such entitlements make up 40% of the annual budget. 
State funds, however, are barely reaching the country's poorest citizens and there is little evidence of poverty reduction. Meanwhile, the bloated public budgets have become unsustainable fiscally. 
Improving the quality of government spending and the delivery of public services for the vulnerable is one of the two pillars of the World Bank's current Country Partnership Strategy for 2008-2011 for BiH. 
Last month, the Bank's board of executive directors approved a Development Policy Operation (DPO) to the tune of $84m, with the funds allocated 60% - 40% between FBiH and Republika Srpska (RS).The DPO -- prepared at the request of BiH authorities -- aims to provide budgetary support for public expenditure reform. 
That, in turn, will help state aid reach the most vulnerable. 
"Successful implementation of these reforms would unlock not only World Bank funds, but it remains a critical condition for the satisfactory implementation of the fiscal framework BiH agreed with the IMF," the Bank's BiH Country Manager, Marco Mantovanelli, told SETimes. 
The DPO complements the recently approved IMF stand-by arrangement. It also builds on the Bank's approval in February of a $19m Social Safety Net and Employment Support Project, as well as a $53m credit for Small- and Medium- Enterprises (SMEs) that was approved last December. 
IMF funds, though, could be in jeopardy due to a stand-off over benefits. On April 21st, war veterans protested violently in Sarajevo, rejecting any changes in their entitlements, and the government has been uncertain on how to proceed. 
An IMF mission is visiting BiH until May 17th to determine if the country fulfills the conditions for releasing the third tranche of the stand-by arrangement. If BiH does not meet the conditions, it will need to find other sources of funds, as the sums have already been factored into existing budgets. 
 "Reforms are unavoidable, with or without the World Bank and the IMF, and they have been made more urgent by the impact of the economic crisis," Mantovanelli said. 
Not implementing the reforms would produce massive cuts in entitlements for all beneficiaries, disproportionately affecting the significant number of citizens who rely most on them for subsistence. 
 Bank officials explain that BiH receives the most of any country in Europe from the cash transfer programme. But under the current system, programme beneficiaries who are top income earners receive a larger share of public funds than those with lower incomes. 
Moving ahead with the ambitious legislative framework recently approved by the two BiH entities would allow the entity governments to progressively make social protection and veteran's programmes more equitable and financially sustainable, officials say. Meanwhile, the people who don't need such benefits due to high incomes from other sources will not feel the sting. 
The Bank lending programme for 2009-1010 also envisions support through the DPO for BiH's budgets, which are under pressure due to a drop in revenues. 
BiH joined the Bank in 1996, and has since received over $1.4 billion through 66 projects. At present, the Bank's BiH portfolio includes 17 active projects worth $454m. 
