04/09/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 04/09/06
The ruling Democratic Party (DP) and the opposition Socialist Party (SP) signed an agreement on Wednesday (30 August) that ends a longstanding stalemate over electoral reform in Albania. The agreement met the conditions set by the left-wing opposition, following a week of negotiations. 
The agreement calls for the elimination of the temporary voter registry, and for the number of members in the Central Electoral Commission (CEC) to go from seven to nine, allowing smaller parties to gain representation. It also says that in the CEC, a simple majority is five-four and qualified majority is six-three. 
With the local elections approaching -- to be held sometime between 20 November and 20 January -- the parties agreed that the temporary voter registries need to be cleaned up before 20 October. They will then no longer be the source for the voter's lists for the elections. The document also calls for the legal framework to be amended to ensure that regular parliamentary and municipal elections are held either in spring or autumn every four years. 
The agreement also stipulates that the National Council of Radio and Television (NCRT) be expanded from five to seven members, with the two new members coming from civil society and selected by the opposition. The Steering Council of Albanian public Radio and Television (SCART) is expanded from seven to eleven members with the four new members coming from civil society, and proposed by the opposition and with the fourth one being agreed upon by both political wings. 
On Friday, the OSCE and the US praised the agreement. "I believe the agreement opens the way for a constructive relationship between the majority and the opposition and towards their co-operation in pursuing the key domestic reforms," OSCE Europe head Pavel Vacek said. 
A statement from Washington said that "rapid implementation of this understanding is vital. It is our hope that this agreement will serve as a good first step towards electoral reform, as well as free and fair local elections." 
Prime Minister Sali Berisha said the agreement is the "fruit of dialogue", while opposition leader Edi Rama said that although the document fulfils opposition requests, many democracy-related problems must be solved. 
"This is good news for everyone, as everybody in Albania is looking forward to a process, in which everybody's vote is taken into account. The opposition cares about this issue; we want to guarantee standards, values and aims that cannot be touched by anyone," Rama said. 
President Alfred Moisiu welcomed the agreement, and called on both political sides to respect it in order to reduce political tensions for the sake of free and fair elections. He also said that the agreement opened the way for co-operation among political forces to solve the major issues confronting the country. 
