23/12/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 23/12/09
Serbian President Boris Tadic submitted Serbia's application for EU membership at an official ceremony in Stockholm on Tuesday (December 22nd). 
Tadic handed the application to Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt, whose country holds the rotating EU presidency until the end of the year. EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and Swedish Foreign Affairs Minister Carl Bildt were also present. 
"Today is a historic day for Serbia," said Tadic after delivering the application. 
He explained that the memorandum accompanying the application "reflects the general societal consensus regarding the European orientation of the Republic of Serbia and her membership in the EU". 
Tadic also announced that Serbia will meet all requirements to join the Union. 
"We will continue to make efforts to arrest all those indicted for war crimes and will aim to find stable and safe solutions for all remaining open issues in the region. We want to contribute to the integration into Europe," he said. 
The Serbian leadership decided to apply after being strongly encouraged by diplomats from Sweden as well as Spain -- which is next in line to preside over the EU -- even though the EU has not yet begun to ratify the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia. 
A clear signal came two weeks ago as the EU Council of Ministers unblocked the Interim Trade Agreement with Serbia, which was previously frozen by the Netherlands over Belgrade's incomplete co-operation with The Hague tribunal. 
Reinfeldt praised the developments, describing Serbia's application is important not only for Belgrade, but for the entire Western Balkans, while Bildt added that Sweden's priority had been to unblock the Balkans' association with the EU. 
Rehn called Serbia's application "the crown of the Swedish presidency". 
"Serbia is a key Western Balkan country and we see the entire region moving towards the EU. That is very important for peace and stability and the future of Europe," said Rehn. 
However, not everyone in Belgrade was thrilled with the news. Opposition parties criticised the government for applying too soon without securing support from all EU members. The opposition also cited the government's inability to resolve the Kosovo issue, whose independence is recognised by 22 of the 27 EU member states. 
Analyst Dusan Reljic agrees, telling Radio Deutsche Welle that next, Serbia will receive an extensive questionnaire from Brussels including a question on the country's borders. Unlike the majority of the EU members, Belgrade considers Kosovo under its jurisdiction. 
Once Serbia returns the filled-out questionnaire, the EU will evaluate it and determine whether to give the country candidate status. 
