09/07/2004
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 09/07/04
Romanian Prime Minister Adrian Nastase broke nearly a week of silence Thursday (8 July) to announce that he would not resign as leader of the ruling Social Democratic Party (PSD). Instead, Nastase said, he would seek changes within the party and the government.
"I will not give up the PSD leadership because we need radical changes within the party, and I definitely can achieve this objective. I will carry out my mandate as prime minister, but in the forthcoming period I will reshuffle the governmental team," Nastase said.
He acknowledged there had been rumours he would step down from the party post because of the PSD's poor showing in the recent local elections. "We had a situation after these elections and I considered all options, including my resignation as president of the party," he said.
Romanian President Ion Iliescu, considered the PSD's spiritual father, has sharply criticised the party's top leaders over the election results, charging that they have lost touch with voters and failed to distance themselves from individuals accused of corruption. Iliescu has also indicated that he will stage a political comeback within the PSD if the party fails to "cleanse" itself.
That stance has angered Nastase and spawned protests from the liberal democratic opposition, which has accused Iliescu of violating constitutional provisions that forbid the head of state from meddling in party politics. Nastase and Iliescu met Thursday morning, reportedly to resolve their differences. Nastase is expected to decide soon on his nominee to succeed Iliescu as president.
The rift between the president and prime minister has further weakened the party's position following its setback in the local elections. Earlier in the year, few Romanians doubted that the PSD would prevail in the November general elections. Analysts say the party now appears to be confused, torn by infighting, and unable to respond to warning signs from the public.
