11/01/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 11/01/11
Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov's invitation to Serbia to partner with Bulgaria in the construction of the Belene nuclear power plant has sparked heated discussions in Belgrade. With consensus nowhere in sight, the debate has now reached the government. 
Serbia made a "principled decision" to participate in the construction of the plant in neighbouring Bulgaria, Mining and Energy Minister Petar Skundric told the Belgrade media in early December, describing it as an "important regional and European project". 
The final decision, he said, will be based on the Bulgarian government's offer and the results of studies conducted by Serbia. 
Belgrade will take into consideration the level of Serbia's involvement in the project and the government's available funds for it, Skundric added. 
Environment and Spatial Planning Minister Oliver Dulic thinks Serbian involvement is a bad idea, however. In his view, the country would be better off focusing its efforts elsewhere. 
"Serbia should seek ways to make up its energy deficit from renewable energy sources, because it has great potential in biomass and hydropower potential," Dulic said. He added that the environment ministry will oppose the use of nuclear energy until all renewable energy sources are exhausted. 
Skundric, however, thinks renewable energy sources cannot meet demand, which is expected to double over the next 30 to 40 years. He says Serbia gets as much as 62% of energy from coal-fueled thermal plants; domestic coal reserves will last up to 50 years. 
Some environmental NGOs also oppose Serbia's involvement in the Belene project. 
The Centre for Environment and Sustainable Development held rallies in December protesting Belgrade's potential participation. 
 The organisation's representative, Zvezdan Kalmar, told SETimes that Serbia should not take part in Belene for "environmental, economic and safety reasons". 
 "The nuclear plant is being built on highly unstable terrain [earthquake-prone], and there is cause for concern over its impact on the environment," Kalmar said. 
The 1,060MW Belene plant will be built in northern Bulgaria, near the Danube, by the Russian firm Atomstroyexport. The cost is estimated at between 7 billion and 9 billion euros. 
