27/07/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 27/07/06
The fifth general election since the Dayton Peace Agreement will be held in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on 1 October. Some 2.7 million citizens will vote for three candidates for the BiH presidency. In BiH, voters will also elect candidates for the cantonal parliament, and in Republika Srpska (RS), voters will elect the president and vice-president. 
Forty-eight parties have submitted their candidate sheets. There are also 12 independent candidates. According to political analysts, only eight parties will pass the electoral quota of 3 per cent. However, these eight parties will face the most unpredictable fight yet. 
The upcoming vote, many politicians say, is the main reason why constitutional changes in BiH have been blocked, along with the EU-backed police reform. 
The latest public opinion poll, conducted by the UNDP, shows that the nationalist Party of Democratic Action (SDA) leads among Bosniak voters. It supports the proposed constitutional overhaul. But Haris Silajdzic -- who finished a close second in the race for Bosniak presidency member four years ago --opposes the changes, and retains a large following. He will be SDA leader Sulejman Tihic's main opponent. 
The vote among BiH Croats may be the most interesting. They have been supporting the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) for the last 15 years. After an inter-party struggle, however, dissatisfied members have formed a new party named HDZ 1990. Their candidate, Bozo Ljubic, could give his former party colleague, incumbent presidency member Ivo Miro Jovic, some tough competition. 
 For the position of Serbian member of the BiH presidency, it is a close race between Alliance of Independent Social Democrats candidate Nebojsa Radmanovic and Serb Democratic Party candidate Mladen Bosic. Both support accepting the constitutional changes after the elections. The incumbent Serb member of the presidency, Borislav Paravac, was appointed following the dismissal of Mirko Sarovic. 
 Passive voter registration has been applied this year for the first time. According to the Election Commission, this new method could bring around 400,000 thousand new -- and mostly younger -- voters to the polls. 
This year, the election campaign will formally last 30 days instead of the usual 60. The vote will cost taxpayers 4.5m euros, although political parties are barred from spending more than 15 euros per voter. 
