12/03/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 12/03/12
The Serbian dinar (RSD) has reached a historic low against the euro. In 2002, when the German mark was replaced, a euro was valued at 60 dinars. On March 12th, the exchange rate was 110.63 RSD. 
The dinar has steadily been weakening in the last decade, but its depreciation dramatically increased in recent years. The RSD continued to weaken in the last two months, despite numerous interventions by the National Bank of Serbia (NBS) through foreign exchange placements. 
In a statement, the bank said weakening of the dinar this year was caused by an unexpected increase in energy imports. 
Changes in the dinar value have multiple effects on the domestic economy, which mainly depends on import or export-oriented enterprises. While euro strengthening corresponds to export entrepreneurs, that in turn hurts importers. 
Mile Dragic, the director and owner of a company manufacturing military and police equipment that exports to more than 30 countries, including the US, says manufacturers that rely on imported components are most at risk by the weakened dinar. 
"Public companies negotiate prices only in dinars without possible corrections. In our example, from the contract date until the day of collection, more than six months can go by, and because prices are fixed in dinars, in case of inflation we lose exact amount as the inflation, so we do not have enough to cover simple reproduction," Dragic told SETimes. 
Dragic, who employs more than 350 workers, is also worried about the effect on individual employees because the weakening of the exchange rate reduces general purchasing power. 
Slobodan Aleksic, 56, a Vranje stove factory worker, provides a good example. "It is difficult to handle pressures because I'm alone in the family [with] a safe job. My wife lost hers because the factory she worked for closed down, and our daughter works in a small private company which is not stable at all. The worse thing is that we took a loan in euros and bought a car for her. My salary is not linked to currency, nor is my daughter's," Aleksic told SETimes. 
In order to prevent serious consequences of dinar variations, the NBS is trying to promote the use of the dinar, and reduce the use of other currencies. 
One possible measure to reduce the depreciation of the domestic currency is raising the NBS benchmark interest rate, said Dejan Jovovic, a Serbian Chamber of Commerce adviser. 
"When the benchmark interest rate is increased, loans automatically become more expensive, the money supply is reduced, and when the money supply is reduced then the word is about the lack of dinars and it, automatically, leads to dinar strengthening," Jovovic told SETimes. 
