25/05/2005
(Reuters, BBC -- 19/05/05; Balkananalysis.com -- 16/05/05)
Chief war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte said last week that she expects Croatia's renewed efforts to capture fugitive retired General Ante Gotovina to succeed soon, thereby enabling the EU to open accession talks with the Balkan country. 
"We expect Gotovina in The Hague. Very soon, I hope. Prime Minister [Ivo] Sanader has provided a plan for locating Gotovina and destroying the network which supports him, so we expect the results of this plan very soon," del Ponte told reporters at the Vienna-based OSCE on Thursday (19 May). 
She was referring to a new action plan announced earlier this month by Sanader, who expressed confidence that EU entry talks would start in June. Originally scheduled to get under way in March, the negotiations have been postponed due to Croatia's failure to bring Gotovina to justice. 
He is one of the top three fugitive indictees wanted by the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague. UN prosecutors indicted Gotovina in 2001 on charges stemming from his alleged role in atrocities committed during the Croatian Army's 1995 offensive against Serb separatists in the Krajina area. 
Officials in Zagreb have argued that his whereabouts are unknown and that he may not even be in Croatia. But del Ponte insists Gotovina is within reach of Croatian authorities and has "a well-organised support network, including within state structures". 
Del Ponte said she told the OSCE ambassadors Thursday that Croatian authorities have signaled their readiness to take concrete action. "If the prime minister is now willing, as it appears, to destroy this network, we will be able very soon to have the location of [Gotovina]," she said. 
Gotovina served in the French Foreign Legion in the 1970s and has a French passport, but del Ponte said there is no sign that he has used it. Nor, she said, is there evidence he used a recently discovered forged Croatian passport. That suggests he is still in the country, del Ponte added. 
She confirmed that General Philippe Rondot, of the French intelligence, has been involved in tracking Gotovina. 
She also ruled out the possibility of Gotovina's trial being referred to Croatia. 
While voicing optimism about the prospects, she also warned that Zagreb must make good on its promises and show results by 13 June. Otherwise, del Ponte said, she will have to inform the UN Security Council that the fugitive is still in reach of the authorities and that the government is still not fully co-operating with the tribunal. 
Ten people indicted by the UN war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia remain at large, including Gotovina, Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan Karadzic and his military chief, Ratko Mladic. 
"The reason why they are still at large is very simple," del Ponte said. "The relevant authorities are not making sufficient efforts to locate and apprehend them." 
