14/06/2005
(AFP, International Herald Tribune, The Guardian, The Independent, Sofia News Agency - 14/06/05; AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, VOA, The Guardian, EUobserver, EurActiv, EUpolitix, FT, HINA, Sofia News Agency - 13/06/05) 
In a break from previous practice, EU leaders are not expected to discuss the further expansion of the Union at their two-day summit, opening in Brussels on Thursday (16 June). Diplomatic sources suggested Monday that the final declaration of the high-level meeting this week would only briefly reiterate the EU's commitment to previous decisions on the issue. 
The meeting in Brussels will be the first gathering of leaders of the 25 member nations since the recent French and Dutch "no" votes on the EU constitutional treaty. The rejections were described as largely reflecting voters' discontent with national governments. However, public concern over the Union's fast-track expansion was also cited as a factor. 
Enlargement had initially been included in the provisional agenda of the Brussels summit. Fearing that expansion is becoming less and less popular among some member states, however, EU foreign ministers decided in Luxembourg on Monday that an extended discussion should be avoided. Because skipping the topic altogether could be viewed as a negative signal both by prospective member states and financial markets, the ministers decided that a generic clause about enlargement should be included in the declaration. 
"The European Council recalls furthermore its conclusions of 16 December - 17 December on enlargement and underlines the need to implement them in full," Reuters quoted the draft as saying. 
In December, the EU leaders set 3 October as the starting date for Turkey's accession talks, making it conditional on implementation of economic and political reform commitments, as well as on a protocol extending a customs agreement with the Union to cover its ten new member states, including Cyprus. 
During Monday's meeting, the EU foreign ministers approved the text of the protocol and have reportedly sent it to Ankara. Turkey is now expected to sign the document within weeks, thus meeting all the conditions set by Brussels for the start of its entry talks. 
 
The progress of another candidate country, Croatia, hinges on full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). On Monday, the EU ministers pledged to revisit the issue of Croatia's membership talks at a meeting on 18 July. They also urged Zagreb to make further efforts to implement its action plan aimed at resolving the case of fugitive war crimes indictee Ante Gotovina. 
Croatia has "made progress which may lead to full co-operation", Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn, whose country currently holds the EU presidency, told reporters. 
Bulgaria and Romania are viewed as the candidate countries most immediately concerned by the recent "no" votes to the EU constitution. The two countries signed their accession treaties in April and are scheduled to join the Union on 1 January 2007. In recent days, however, there have been calls for the postponement of their entry. 
In an interview with the German newspaper Bild on Sunday, EU External Affairs Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner suggested that the process of enlargement should slow down. 
"We need to give our citizens time to breathe," said the commissioner. "We must fulfil what we have said, but my idea is to reduce the speed of enlargement." 
Speaking to the German daily Sueddeutsche Zeitung, however, European Commission Vice President Guenter Verheugen said Bulgaria and Romania's EU membership remain among the Union's priorities. Verheugen, who until last year was the EU's commissioner for enlargement, stressed that the process should continue despite the referenda results, warning that stability in Southeast Europe depends on it. 
