13/12/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 13/12/10
Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) and Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) supporters both rallied in downtown Pristina on Sunday (December 12th) night, celebrating their party's "victory" in the country's first parliamentary elections since its 2008 declaration of independence. 
Kosovo Police divided the groups, preventing the situation from escalating as supporters chanted slogans at each other. 
 LDK leader Isa Mustafa urged his supporters to be patient. "Let's wait for the results, keep calm, keep order." 
PDK leader Hashim Thaci adopted a different approach, telling supporters "Congratulations on the victory", adding that the "win" was a civic referendum on "the good governance of PDK" and its vision for the future. "We did not win against anybody, we won for Kosovo," Thaci said. 
The Centre for Humanitarian Studies, Gani Bobi in Pristina, announced exit poll results Sunday night. According to those, PDK is leads with 31% of the vote, while LDK trails with 25%. Vetevendosja, led by Albin Kurti, pulled 16% of the votes, beating Ramush Haradinaj's Alliance for the Future of Kosovo and other parties. 
The exit poll included over 2,000 voters. According to Gani Bobi's Shkelzen Maliqi, the margin of error is up to 3.5%. 
Sunday evening was marred by accusations between political parties blaming each other of incidents. Kurti's Vetevendosje movement accused PDK of attacks and other irregularities, which have been confirmed in many cases by the NGO coalition Democracy in Action, which monitored the vote, and the police. 
Irregularities mainly consisted of multiple votes by same the same person, family voting, exerting pressure on monitors and members of election commissions, as well as problems with identification sprays and lamps. 
The most flagrant irregularities are believed to have happened in Skenderaj/Srbica where the Central Election Commission (CEC) reported turnout of over 94%. Democracy in Action confirmed that serious violations have also been registered in Drenas/Gllogovac, which could lead to a general dispute of the election process. 
"Manipulation and irregularities have damaged the election process. In Skenderaj/Srbica and Drenas/Gllogovac there was manipulation of the free vote", coalition representative Ismet Kryeziu said. According to the CEC, 779,000 people voted in Sunday's elections -- 47.8% of the total number of registered voters. 
 CEC head Valdete Daka said the turnout among Serbs in the north was satisfying. However, Kosovo police confirmed isolated incidents in the north, and two Serbs were arrested. A small group of Serbs protested in front of a mobile polling station in Leposavic and a poll centre was attacked in Leposavic. 
KFOR Commander General Erhard Buhler said that, in general, the vote was a success from a security standpoint. 
"The situation on Election Day in Kosovo -- all in all -- was calm and stable; no real significant violence has been reported. There was no major unrest or public disorder," he said, adding that a great number of KFOR soldiers were and still are ready and determined to support the police if necessary. 
