18/08/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 18/08/06
Provided its obligations to the UN war crimes tribunal are met quickly, the EU's door will be wide open for Serbia, Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic and Deputy Prime Minister Ivana Dulic-Markovic concluded on Thursday (17 August). The two were in Brussels to present to EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn a set of proposals aimed at restarting dialogue with the EU. 
"It's all up to Serbia. We can enter the EU outright if we complete co-operation with The Hague, and continue to implement reforms. The Union is prepared to support Serbia, but we must first do our homework," Dinkic said. "If we manage to fulfil our obligations and full co-operation with ICTY, the European Commission and the EU will try to support our further steps into integration." 
Early in May, the EU froze pre-accession talks with Serbia due to its failure to arrest former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic, as required by the UN tribunal. Last month, the EU welcomed a Serbian "action plan" to catch Mladic, but said it needed to be fleshed out and implemented to allow the restart of talks on eventual EU membership. 
Future relations with the EU will hinge on whether the plan yields results, Dulic-Markovic said. 
"We received assurances that the EU had not given up on Serbia," she added, cautioning however that Brussels would be unlikely to offer additional assistance unless Belgrade meets its international obligations. 
The two Serbian officials gave Rehn suggestions on ways in which the EU could help Serbia in the forthcoming period. These ideas mainly pertain to economic support in the area of investments, as well as EU support in education and easing the visa regime. 
In an interview Thursday with the Serbian news agency Tanjug, Rehn said he was satisfied with the fact that Serbia has a programme and that it is continuing to implement reforms. He stressed that reforms in Serbia were going in the right direction. 
"I am satisfied that the Finnish presidency held an additional meeting in July, enabling the Council to adopt the negotiations mandate for Serbia sooner than expected. That means that the talks can continue as soon as actions leading to the arrest and extradition of Mladic yield results." 
