14/02/2012
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 14/02/12
Along with their new government, Romanians may be seeing a new standard of living soon if the new executive economic programme comes to fruitation. However, analysts and citizens alike are sceptical that this is possible in light of the economic cloud that is hanging over the globe. 
The programme focuses on the government's intention to raise Romanians' standard of living by raising the population's income through salary or pension raises, decreasing social security contributions and raising taxes for the wealthy. 
Despite these provisions, new Prime Minister Mihai Razvan Ungureanu tempered expectations. 
"I do not come forth with unrealistic promises in these hard times. An era of prosperity will not start tomorrow. Prudence and responsibility are the key words of this government. Salaries and pensions will be raised only if this is possible," Ungureanu told parliament Thursday (February 9th). 
Plans also include promoting policies to stimulate economic growth and creating new jobs by attracting EU funds to an absorption rate of 29%, or 6 billion euros, Ungureanu said. 
A National Job Creation Plan will be established to encourage employment by means of financial incentives for employers, while a "responsible" salary grid will be conceived for state employees. 
One analyst said he wants specifics. 
"I expected concrete measures, not a general wording of this programme," Association of Businessman in Romania General-Secretary Cristian Parvan told SETimes. "Clear measures with rapid application. And we want to know when they will start applying them, but mainly when these decisions will pay off." 
"I think the main priority of this new government should be the removal of all the blockages at the level of public administration that stand in the way of the projects that attract most of the EU funds, namely environment and infrastructure development," he added. 
Parvan suggests the creation of a bank of industries, echoing the recent notion of French President Nicolas Sarkozy. "There can be no increase in the people's incomes unless we stimulate production." 
The new administration faces two main challenges, Romanian Centre for Economic Policies analyst Aurelian Dochia told SETimes. 
"First, it has to see the IMF agreement to the very end -- an agreement which now is basically the large framework for any economic policies in Romania. Secondly, we cannot ignore the short life of this government -- it is unlikely their measures will show any concrete results this year," he said, referring to parliamentary elections in November. 
Dochia also recommended caution in the government's public statements. "Romania's economic recovery is still fragile before external factors. Any premature reference to salary raises is worrisome. They first have to identify the financial source," he said. 
The new government has also to make sure it won't go beyond the deficit target that is likely to be set, since it is an election year. 
In the street, citizens wait for results. 
"A governing programme is like a lesson plan I make at school. I do not follow it, my class [would] be ruined," history teacher Alin Stroe, 38, told SETimes. 
"I do not [have] illusions that my salary will be raised. But they should be aware that if [the programme is] for the sake of image, if nothing is done with respect to those deprived of their earnings amid the austerity, their image will be even worse at the end of the term." 
