07/06/2011
By Alina Radu for Southeast European Times in Chisinau – 07/06/11
Journalists in Moldova have long faced constraints on press freedom. In recent weeks, however, the industry has run into a new challenge – fraudulent newspapers produced for apparent political purposes and passed off as the real ones. 
Two papers – the weekly Ziarul de Garda [The Guard] and daily Timpul [The Time] – both fell victim to such hoaxes. Bogus editions of the papers, containing attacks against pro-European political parties, were printed and distributed ahead of the general election on June 5th. 
Such scams, the real Ziarul de Garda said in a press statement, constitute "an attack on the image of the actual newspaper, which, over the seven years of publishing, avoided political partisanship and offered its readers maximum transparency". 
 "Cloning newspapers for political manipulation damages the image of independent press in Moldova," Sorina Stefarta, the Timpul deputy editor-in-chief told SETimes. 
Both newspapers, along with media-related NGOs, requested a police investigation. It took a few weeks for the authorities to find the hidden newspaper factory. The trail eventually led them to an entire team of communications specialists, including editors and translators. 
The personnel involved were arrested on May 13th as they were preparing the next issue of a fake Moldovan newspaper. But the politicians behind the scam have not yet been identified. 
Gheorghe Malic, the head of the criminal investigation team, explained that the goal of illegal newspaper producers was to manipulate public opinion ahead of the local elections. Hefty funds were reportedly spent on production, printing and distribution. 
 "People have the right to transparency and that the principle should be respected in this case also," said Minister of Interior Alexei Roibu. 
"The Moldovan police must reveal the names of those who allegedly used fake newspapers, thereby violating copyright to score political points," South East European Media Organization Secretary-General Oliver Vujovic said. 
The scandal comes on the heels of the latest Freedom House Report on media freedom around the globe. Moldova rose in the latest rankings -- from 144 to 118 -- and the report noted improvements, while still deeming the media only partially free. 
Though media diversification has brought more freedom to journalists, problems remain "more numerous than achievements", Moldovan Advanced School of Journalism Director Corina Cepoi said. 
Journalists are arbitrarily stopped from going into public places when certain politicians are expected to appear; access to documents are delayed or denied without a legal validation, Cepoi told SETimes. 
 Fake newspapers, experts say, represent a new set of problems that journalists now have to face. 
