09/02/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 09/02/10
Romania confirmed last week that it is ready to take part in the new version of the US anti-missile defence shield. Speaking in Brussels on Thursday (February 4th), President Traian Basescu spoke of "allied solidarity" between his country and the United States, while also seeking to assuage Moscow's concerns. 
 "The new system is not aimed against Russia," Basescu said. "I would like to stress very much, Romania will not host a system against Russia, but against other threats." 
 Romania, the president explained, will host ground interceptors, with the missile shield elements becoming operational by 2015. The shield will cover the entire territory and protect against medium- and short-range missile attacks, he said. 
"The gradual-adaptive development of the anti-missile system in Europe, including the elements in Romania, is entirely consistent with the decisions made at the Bucharest NATO summit," Basescu said. 
Bucharest and Washington will soon hold bilateral negotiations followed by a ratification of necessary agreements by the Romanian parliament, he added. 
The planned defence system is a combination of land- and sea-based SM-3 missile interceptor systems and was discussed by US Vice-President Joe Biden in Bucharest in October 2009. The United States earlier dropped an initial anti-missile shield plan in Poland and the Czech Republic. 
According to US Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs PJ Crowley, Romania's decision extends the area of missile defence coverage into southern Europe. "As this architecture develops and grows, it will protect all of Europe," he said. 
Analysts say Romania sees a potential boost to its role in the region as a result of signing onto the plan. 
"Installing elements of the anti-missile shield on our territory carries three important benefits for Romania," said Iulia Enache, Deputy Chief of the Foreign Affairs department with the Romanian news agency Mediafax. 
Those benefits are, she said: "Romania's entrance into the geopolitical games and the possibility to become a key regional player, achievement of an enhanced security and a much closer co-operation with the United States, with all the ensuing advantages." 
"By accepting to join a global defence system, Romania becomes one of Europe's defence pillars as well. By exploiting these resources, Romania can have a crucial say in the Black Sea region," Enache added. 
She also noted possible economic benefits, saying that "… the presence of such a base implies a certain development of local economy, through the building, maintenance and service contracts, but also through a more fervent local real estate market and a better quality of infrastructure and communications." 
