11/02/2010
(EurActiv, Euobserver, Euronews, Zaman - 11/02/10; DPA, BBC, MIA, MINA, The Sofia Echo, European Parliament - 10/02/10)
The European Parliament (EP) adopted separate resolutions Wednesday (February 10th) on accession progress made in the last year by each of the three official EU candidates. It gave a positive overall assessment of Croatia and Macedonia's efforts to qualify for entry in the 27-nation bloc. Turkey's preparations for membership, it said, remained "limited". 
The EP called on all three nations to continue implementing EU-required reforms, particularly in the areas of rule of law, freedom of expression, good neighbourly relations, minority and women's rights, and the fight against organised crime and corruption. 
Croatia, which began membership talks with the EU in October 2005, has made the most progress among the three candidates. It has opened 28 of all 35 negotiating chapters so far and 17 have been provisionally closed already. 
The recent arbitration agreement on the country's border dispute with Slovenia has "created the momentum to open all remaining chapters," the EP noted in the resolution on Croatia's accession progress, which was approved in a 582-24 vote, with 37 abstentions. 
 EU lawmakers said Zagreb could wrap up its membership negotiations in 2010, provided it steps up efforts in the areas of public administration and judicial reform along with combating corruption and organised crime. It also needs to show full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. 
"We are encouraged by recent developments in the fight against corruption and hope that investigations will lead to concrete results," said Stefan Fuele, the EU's new enlargement commissioner. "I trust Croatia will be able to seize the moment and intensify efforts to solve outstanding issues." 
The process between the conclusion of accession talks and a country's formal entry into the Union can take up to two years. Croatia is expected to join the EU as its 28th member in 2012. 
 Its entry "would give positive impetus to the process of European integration in the rest of the Western Balkans region," said the resolution drafted by Hannes Swoboda, an Austrian member of the EP 
Macedonia was recognised as an official EU candidate in December 2005, but has not begun accession talks. An EU decision on opening negotiations with Skopje was postponed last December due to pressure from Greece, which has threatened to continue blocking Macedonia's membership until the long-standing name dispute between the two countries is resolved. 
The resolution, drafted by Slovenian MEP Zoran Thaler and adopted by a 548-45 vote with 35 abstentions, urged the EU to set a date for the launch of Macedonia's membership talks during its March summit. The document also called on Skopje and Athens to "redouble their efforts at the highest level to find a mutually satisfactory solution to the name issue". 
Lawmakers said they expected the negotiations "to begin in the near future". But Spanish Minister of State for the European Union Diego Lopez Garrido, whose country currently holds the six-month rotating EU presidency, said it would be impossible for that to happen in the next six months without a resolution to the name issue. 
Voicing support for the Greek government's suggestion of a "symbolic and motivational target date of 2014" for the EU accession of all Western Balkan nations, the EP resolution urged countries in the region to work toward that goal. 
The Turkish resolution was drafted by Dutch MEP Ria Oomen-Ruijten and adopted by show of hands. It noted that the launch of Ankara's talks in October 2005 was the starting point for "a long-lasting and open-ended process". 
Twelve of the 35 negotiating chapters have been opened so far, with one provisionally closed. Talks on another eight chapters were frozen about four years ago over Turkey's failure to meet commitments under a July 2005 deal with the EU that extended its customs union with the bloc to all its new member states, including Cyprus. 
The MEPs -- criticising Ankara for its continuing refusal to open its ports and airports to Greek Cypriot ships and planes -- warned Wednesday that this "may further seriously affect the process of negotiations". 
The resolution further urged Ankara to support the ongoing talks on ending the more than 35-year-old division of Cyprus and contribute "in concrete terms" to the effort of reaching a comprehensive solution. It also said that Turkey must immediately begin removing its forces from the Mediterranean island. Voicing regret over the annulment of legislation limiting the jurisdiction of military courts, the MEPs also called on Turkey to reform its constitution. 
The MEPs welcomed the adoption of a law removing restrictions on broadcasting in the Kurdish language and praised Ankara for taking steps to normalise relations with Armenia. 
