17/11/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 17/11/05
Bilateral co-operation, EU integration and a planned independence referendum were the main topics on the agenda during Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic's recent two-day visit to Bulgaria, which concluded on 1 November. His meeting with Bulgarian counterpart Georgi Parvanov was part of an ongoing dialogue, aimed at boosting the solid neighbourly relations Bulgaria and Montenegro already enjoy. 
Noting that his country is on the threshold of joining the EU, Parvanov told Vujanovic that Bulgaria could offer expert assistance about the integration process. The offer was warmly welcomed by Vujanovic, who said Montenegro could benefit greatly from Bulgaria's positive experience. Bulgarian officials have also signalled their readiness to offer expert assistance in the process of joining NATO's Partnership for Peace programme, and ultimately NATO itself, Vujanovic told reporters. 
Vujanovic briefed Parvanov on his government's plans for an independence referendum. He said the proposed vote would be discussed between the administration and the opposition, most likely in parliament. Montenegro has made an offer to Serbia regarding a union of independent states, and the deal will be on the table until the actual date of the referendum, Vujanovic said. 
The two presidents also talked about the need to affirm regional values, and Vujanovic commended Parvanov for organising the Cultural Corridors Regional Forum in Varna in May. This was their third meeting of the year. 
While in Sofia, Vujanovic also met with Prime Minister Sergei Stanishev. They focused on the need to boost economic co-operation, especially in the sectors of tourism, shipping and agriculture. 
Vujanovic participated in the 7th Economic Forum of Southeast Europe, held in Sofia during his visit. The forum, focused on issues pertaining to small and medium sized companies and the creation of a knowledge economy, serves as a valuable opportunity for exchanging experiences. Addressing the event, Vujanovic said moving closer towards the EU -- a process which formally started on 10 October with the launch of Stabilisation and Association talks -- is crucial to Montenegro's economic growth. 
