27/01/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Strasbourg -- 27/01/11 
Witness protection varies greatly across the Balkans and countries in the region should act to make it more reliable, the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) said in a resolution adopted on Wednesday (January 26th). It was one of three that relate to the region. 
Monaco's Jean-Charles Gardetto said witness testimony is crucial to the process of uncovering the truth and achieving reconciliation. But in many cases, he said, witnesses have felt hesitant to come forward because they face the threat of retaliation. 
"In Croatia, [there have been] disclosures of the identity of protected witnesses; in Bosnia and Herzegovina witnesses have been threatened and intimidated, and in Kosovo, witnesses have been assassinated," Gardetto told the council. 
 Just days ago, PACE members endorsed a controversial report by Council of Europe rapporteur Dick Marty on alleged organ harvesting during and after the Kosovo conflict, and many agree that testimony from witnesses will play a crucial role in establishing whether those allegations have any basis. 
 "The legitimacy of this investigation will finally and only be secured by the urgent establishing of effective witness protection programmes," Serbian President Boris Tadic said. 
Serbian Minister for Kosovo and Metohija Goran Bogdanovic said the investigation into the Marty allegations will require the protection of witnesses in Kosovo, since the CoE rapporteur said he had put together the report mainly based on statements by Albanian witnesses. 
Milos Aligrudic, a member of the parliamentary delegation to Strasbourg, said PACE's support for the Marty report had brought "a sort of moral satisfaction" to the victims' families. 
"Now Serbia must do everything to ensure an investigation is conducted and the culprits punished for the crimes Marty is talking about," Aligrudic said. 
The two other resolutions adopted on Wednesday deal with reconciliation and dialogue between ex-Yugoslavia countries, and with the obligation of Council of Europe member countries to co-operate in the prosecution of war crimes. 
The affected countries should make the issues of missing persons and refugees a priority, PACE said, in order to aid the reconciliation process. Members also called on BiH to take "urgent steps to respect its commitments as a member of the Council of Europe and undertake comprehensive key reforms, including constitutional reforms". 
The resolution on war crimes prosecution co-operation states that "impunity must be fought resolutely [and] co-operation between all states is essential." 
 SETimes correspondent Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report. 
