04/10/2004
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 04/10/04
Turkey's road to joining the EU started on 12 September 1963, when it became an associate member of the European Economic Community (EEC). In 1970, Turkey and the EEC signed an agreement that foresaw eventual full membership in the Union. Since then, however, the country has faced many hurdles, including economic and political crises and two military coups. 
The most recent obstacle involved adoption of a new penal code, the final phase of a sweeping set of reforms covering everything from human rights to the structure of the National Security Council, through which the military has traditionally exerted its influence over politics. Although adoption of the code is a requirement for EU accession, the Union was far from pleased with a provision -- introduced by the ruling Justice and Development Party -- that would criminalise adultery. After much debate, parliament voted to exclude the controversial clause. 
The penal code enforces the abolition of a ban on Kurdish language broadcasting and instruction, and removes bureaucratic restrictions on non-Muslim religious communities. It establishes tougher penalties for those convicted of rape and honour killings, and stipulates tough punishments -- from 3 years to 12 years in prison -- for anyone convicted of torture. Hundreds of articles in the previously existing penal code have been amended and simplified to reflect contemporary conditions. The new code establishes as its goal the protection of individual rights and freedoms, public order and security, the rule of law, public health, environment and social peace, and the prevention of criminal acts. 
The new code embraces the international standards that Turkey must implement to join the EU. However, even if the European Commission -- in a report scheduled for release Wednesday (October 6)-- gives the green light to opening accession talks, Turkey still has a long road ahead. On Sunday, EU Commissioner for Enlargement Guenter Verheugen said the report would highlight many shortcomings in the reform process and outline problems that still must be addressed. 
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has acknowledged that it could take his country until 2019 to fully meet EU criteria for membership, though he also insists that Turkey has "done its homework" and that it is now up to the EU to hold up its end. 
"We have done everything as it stands in the criteria … the world was our witness. I do not believe that it will happen, but should we receive a negative answer, then we will just rename the Copenhagen criteria the Ankara criteria and go our own way," Erdogan said. 
Meanwhile, German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder has pledged to back the opening of accession talks with Turkey if the EC report is positive. According to Schroeder, the country's reforms represented not just "concessions" to the EU but "stemmed from Erdogan's desire to see Turkey as a modern country". He cautioned, however, that full membership could take a very long time. 
