15/02/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 15/02/10
On Wednesday (February 17th), Belgrade will hold a conference for interior ministers from nations across Southeast Europe. Each participating country will review its role in creating the regional centre in southeastern Serbia as well as what protocols to follow in response to natural disasters and other significant problems. 
Serbian Interior Ministry Emergency Situations Sector chief Predrag Maric told Southeast European Times that the centre will help neighbouring states co-ordinate responses to fires, floods and earthquakes. 
Scheduled to open in 2012, the centre has the backing of Russia according to documents signed last year by Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic and Sergei Shoigu, Russia's minister for emergency situations. 
 SETimes: When can we expect the Nis centre to start operating and what activities will it undertake? 
 Predrag Maric: The centre is to be completed by 2012, but it is likely that new contents will be introduced one by one by that time until the centre takes its final shape. The idea is to make Nis, due to its favourable geographic position and the possibility of reaching various other locations quickly, the centre for emergency situations in Southeast Europe. 
What countries will be involved will be revealed after the February 17th [conference]. Apart from the former Yugoslav republics, we also expect the participation of ministers from Italy, Greece, Cyprus and Albania. There has been a lot of unchecked information about the centre … that a military base is being opened, which is absolutely not true. 
The idea is to hold regional training in Nis and to make it a centre where experts will gather and be sent [when] needed in crisis situations … to have more [expertise] and different teams, such as mine clearing teams and rescue teams for cases of floods, earthquakes and ruins. If you have to evacuate half of a town, where will you relocate all those people? You must have emergency accommodation facilities, tents, power units, kitchens … all that will be located in Nis. 
 SETimes: What is the current quality of regional co-operation in Southeast Europe in regards to severe emergency situations? 
 Maric: We [have] never paid any attention to ethnicity in the emergency situation sector. Co-operation with other countries of the region is good and we hope the opening of the centre in Nis will enhance it further. Every country in the region is special and is individually [expert] in certain areas. All that we are good at should be joined together. 
 SETimes: In late 2009, Serbia passed a new Law on Emergency Situations. What is new in that law? 
 Maric: Serbia was facing outdated [legislation] adjusted to a completely different state, which has long ceased to exist -- Yugoslavia. We had a law on protection from natural disasters dating back to 1977, with an image of Tito in Article 5; and the law on protection from fires from 1988. There was no single institution that would handle protection of citizens in cases of natural disasters. Attempts to get a new law on protection in emergency situations took five years and the law was finally passed right before the end of 2009. The law introduces a system [for reacting] to emergency situations and a single service for those activities. 
The act also foresees close co-operation between local governments and the Interior Ministry's sector for emergency situations. Mayors and members of headquarters for emergency situations, which will now be formed in all municipalities and towns, will have to undergo training for planning reactions to emergency situations. The law is based on prevention, so that we no longer have major disasters such as the flood in the village of Jasa Tomic and the explosion in the Uzice-based weapons factory Prvi Partizan, where seven lives were lost. [The centre] will have its own budget for the first time, within the Interior Ministry's budget. 
 SETimes: An extensive reform of the sector for emergency situations is currently under way. How long will that last? 
 Maric: By reforming the sector, we want to demonstrate that we can do a great deal before joining the EU. The new law has opened the way for introducing the single European telephone number for emergency situations, 112. We expect the first activities to be carried out [by the end] of this year. The single European emergency telephone number is to be introduced in large cities first, primarily in Belgrade, and then in the rest of the country. The project will take three to four years. 
 SETimes: What, in your opinion, is the biggest problem facing Serbia in the sector for emergency situations? 
 Maric: Serbia has 3,000 firemen, but it should have 7,000. Interest has been growing over the past six months during which the emergency service started to form. We are now able to accept 300 people this year and we will send them to those units in which the situation is the most critical. 
