21/06/2013
By Mladen Dragojlovic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 21/06/13
While illegal honey factories in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) produce and sell about 1,000 tonnes of honey annually, the institutions responsible for regulation enforcement and action are lagging behind counterfeit market production. 
Radovan Maksimovic, a beekeeper from Trebinje and president of the Republika Srpska (RS) Beekeeper Association, said the battle against illegal honey producers is still in its early stages. 
"Production of counterfeit honey is highly profitable. Every kilo of this 1,000 tonnes is sold for five euros, and it's easy to see just how effective that market is for producers. It's causing problems, because genuine honey can't cost less than 7.5 to 10 euros [per kilo]. Unfortunately, in this economy, people try to save every euro, and of course they are buying cheaper product even if they really don't know if it's counterfeit or genuine product," Maksimovic told SETimes. 
He said counterfeit honey contains harmful ingredients and is a health hazard. Even if it contains a percentage of real honey, the customer is cheated because it is not the product they intended to buy, he added. 
"These [false] producers are doing a big disservice to us, beekeepers, because our authentic and healthy product can't be sold on the market. Our top quality products have a higher price and lose the battle with counterfeit ones. In the end, the state budget is also marred because these producers do not pay taxes," Maksimovic said. 
Jasmin Kubat, from Komar village near Donji Vakuf in central BiH, sold honey on the roadside for years. 
Recently police seized equipment, 750 kilos of sugar, 1,755 jars of counterfeit honey, and 1,152 empty jars from his honey-making factory. Kubat was charging 5 to 6 euros per kilo of honey. 
"He's just one of many illegal producers. Honey is, unfortunately, just one of many counterfeit foods on the market. There are a number of similar products, but [it's] hard to prove. Every product must have an ingredient label, but we don't have a rigorous enough inspection control to check if the labelled ingredients are in the product," Murisa Maric, president of the customers protection association in Prijedor, told SETimes. 
A good example, she said, is filter bag tea. Several inspections revealed that the bag does not contain the ingredients on the label. Many producers sell cranberry tea containing less than 5 percent of the fruit, Maric added. 
"It's similar with juices, olive oil, coffee and many other products. Two years ago, as one of the EU obligations, Croatian food inspection checked olive oil, and the results were a disaster. Most of their 'extra virgin oil' did not match the [required] quality. Then Croatian authorities adopted the [EU] law to regulate this product on the market. BiH must do the same thing," Maric said. 
Borka Suturov, chief of RS market inspection, said that the battle against counterfeit products on the entity's market has shown some success. According to Suturov, between 2009 and 2012, the number of falsified products is decreasing. 
"It's a result of more market activities, imposed VAT, and penal policy defined by the law on trade and work inspection," Suturov told SETimes. 
What other ways can you suggest to prevent counterfeiting in the Balkan markets? Let us know below. 
