19/05/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 19/05/06
The UN deputy special envoy for Kosovo, Albert Rohan, arrived in Pristina on Thursday (18 May) following talks in Belgrade aimed at hashing out an agreement on decentralisation in the province. 
No progress was reached on the number and type of Serb municipalities to be established in Kosovo, Rohan said. However, he added, Belgrade did provide assurances that it is not seeking to create some sort of Serb entity in Kosovo by means of the decentralisation process. 
Serbian negotiators continue to stick to their insistence on 14 new municipalities and enlargement of four existing ones, Rohan said. "Among these proposed municipalities there are at least five that do not correspond to the criteria of 5,000 people or 70 per cent Serbs," he said. 
For example, Rohan said, "the Serbian side proposes to create a municipality around Gazimestan, which is a monument. Apparently there is the intention to create a hotel for pilgrims. It is not really a municipality, but this is what they are proposing." 
Another proposed municipality would be at Velika Hodja, where there are "five or six very important, very valuable churches," Rohan said. 
The question of Serb returnees is an important factor, the envoy said. However, he added, the boundaries of municipalities have to reflect actual population figures and cannot be based on the figures before 1999, he added. Otherwise, he said, "We would create virtual municipalities, which do not correspond to the actual situation of the population's distribution." 
Protection of historic buildings and religious sites should not be part of the decentralisation issue, but rather should be ensured through other measures, he added. 
During Wednesday's discussions in Belgrade, Serbian officials said they do not intend to introduce a third level of government between the state and the municipalities, or to use decentralisation to establish a Serb entity. 
The Serbian side agreed that "there is a role, first, of the Kosovo institutions in determining decentralisation; second, they accept that there will be framework legislation from the Kosovo Parliament determining the activities even in those areas where the competencies will be with the municipalities," Rohan said. 
Rohan met Kosovo Albanian negotiators Thursday in Pristina, as well as representatives of the Serb and other minority communities. He said the position taken by the Kosovo side was not presenting any major difficulties; however, it must be accepted that municipalities have the right to form partnerships in areas such as health or education. This is "in accordance with the European Charter of Self-Governance," Rohan told reporters. 
He also welcomed a proposal from the Kosovo side for three new municipalities and modification of an existing one. "This is a very positive proposal, which we appreciate, and we think that if one looks at the numbers one could probably enlarge on this proposal," Rohan said. 
"We have agreed, actually both sides have agreed, also here in Pristina that in the next one or two weeks experts will meet. Because you cannot with this big team on the table discuss the precise boundaries, delimitations," Rohan said. "One has to have maps or even go to the municipality and look at what the situation is. So there will be expert meetings in the next few weeks both in Belgrade and Pristina, which will carry the work forward." 
