17/06/2005
(Various sources -- 16/06/05 - 17/06/05)
The EU reassured Bulgaria and Romania on Thursday (16 June) that their entry into the Union, planned for 2007, will not be jeopardised by the delay in the ratification of the bloc's constitutional treaty. 
At the end of the first day of a crunch EU summit in Brussels, Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker, whose country's six-month rotating EU presidency ends on 30 June, pledged that the Union would "stick" to its commitment to admitting the two Balkan nations, which signed their accession treaties in April. 
"The treaties have been signed, they will be respected in full," Juncker said Thursday, after EU leaders decided to extend the November 2006 deadline for ratification of the constitution following its recent rejection by French and Dutch voters. According to the AFP, the draft conclusions of the two-day summit include a reaffirmation of the EU's intention to honour its invitation to Bulgaria and Romania and to implement in full the decisions on enlargement made at a previous summit in December 2004. 
At that summit, the heads of state and government of the 25 EU member nations set 3 October as the start date for accession talks with Turkey, making it conditional on implementation of the country's economic and political reform commitments, as well as on a protocol extending a customs agreement with the Union to cover its ten new member states, including Cyprus. 
They also decided to begin entry talks with Croatia, provided it demonstrates full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. The talks have since been postponed because of Zagreb's failure to deliver a key war crimes indictee, retired General Ante Gotovina, to The Hague court. 
While media reports over the past two weeks have mentioned concerns about expansion -- in particular, the admission of Turkey -- as a significant factor in the French and Dutch rejection of the constitution, two new Eurobarometer polls released Thursday suggest otherwise. 
Surveying French and Dutch citizens, the polls found that "no" voters in the recent referendum mostly cited domestic social, economic and political issues. Some 31 per cent of French respondents said they feared the constitution would have a harmful effect on employment, while 26 per cent were worried about the domestic market. Eighteen per cent said they voted against the constitution out of dissatisfaction with the country's leaders. 
Among Dutch "no" voters, the most frequent reason -- cited by 32 per cent of the respondents there -- was lack of information. Nineteen per cent said they worried about loss of sovereignty. 
