06/12/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 06/12/05
Illegal migrants view Greece as an easy way to get into EU. Many times, asylum seekers are caught at borders, and face brutal treatment, according to an Amnesty International (AI) report on the human rights of illegal immigrants. The report cites instances of people being hit, or even shot, on the borders. 
According to the AI report, Greek authorities are failing to comply with international human rights law and standards regarding access to the asylum process, the detention of migrants and protection from discrimination. "People living on the margins of society -- migrants, asylum seekers, Roma and members of other minorities -- are most likely to be the victims of discrimination in all its forms. Very often, the representatives of the state are their torturers," says Amnesty researcher Olga Demetrious. 
According to the report, migrants seeking refuge in Greece -- from Albania, Iraq, Pakistan and elsewhere -- are caught on borders and mistreated. Others are charged with illegal entry and kept in prison, without being given the right to apply for refugee protection. In some areas in Greece, the conditions of detention are sordid and do not adhere to international law and standards. 
In August, the Greek Parliament passed a new immigration law that seeks to simplify the process for immigrants who apply for residence and work permission. The law also ensures the right to education for underage immigrants with insufficient supporting documents. 
The Lawyers' Initiative for the Rights of Immigrants and Refugees, however, says the new immigration law contains traps that will prevent many immigrants from obtaining their residence permits. One catch is that the law only allows refugees who have had their applications for asylum turned down, apply for legal status. 
Out of some 53,000 applications for asylum submitted in Greece this year, 700 have been turned down and 23 have been accepted. The rest haven't been evaluated yet. 
The lawyers also noted that refugees must present numerous official papers from their homelands -- despite the fact that they have been driven out of those countries. The group said that any state documents issued during an application for asylum in Greece should be accepted as enough evidence. 
Last month, the government accepted that the rules were too strict and would leave up to 70 per cent of illegal immigrants out of the process. 
