16/12/2010
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/12/10
The December 8th deadline for setting up the Bosniak National Council in the western Serbian region of Sandak has come and gone, and Serbian Minister for Human and Minority Rights Svetozar Ciplic says the question now is who will participate in the revote. 
Disputes broke out within Serbia's fractious Bosniak community soon after the June elections for the council. 
The win by the Bosniak Cultural Community (BCA), led by Sandzak's chief Mufti Muamer Zukorlic, brought relations among the three Bosniak community groups in Serbia to a halt. 
The majority of votes went to the BCA. The ticket backed by the Sandzak Democratic Party, led by Serbian Labour Minister Rasim Ljajic, won five seats, while Minister Sulejman Ugljanin's Party of Democratic Action won 13. 
The council was formed only after two representatives from Ljajic's party switched over to Zukorlic's side. But the human and minority rights ministry refused to recognise the council. Since then, Zukorlic has been criticising the Belgrade government, calling for the deployment of EU foreign monitors to Sandzak. 
 Months passed, but still no council. 
The government stepped in this fall and tried to broker talks with the community, to no avail. 
Therefore, the solution is to revote, according to Ciplic. Representatives of Bosniaks should have a national coucil that benefits their community, but not something that results in only personal benefits, he said. 
Zukorlic insists any new election would be illegal. His party will actively boycott the vote, and vows to initiate legal proceedings in Serbia and in the Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. 
Ugljanin's Bosniac List does support new elections. 
 "The non-existence of a Bosniak National Council has led to political abuse," says party representative Esad Dzudzevic, adding that since the talks failed, Ciplic is obliged to hold new elections. 
Bosniak Renaissance, however, says that may not be enough. 
"After new elections we must to sit down and talk because no one will form a council alone," party co-ordinator Seadetin Mujezinovic said. "Unfortunately, there are some personal interests that can not be overcome now." 
In September, Ian Bancroft, founder of the Transconflict organisation, told SETimes that the Sandzak issue should be resolved primarily through agreement within the Bosniak community. 
"Sandzak is almost unique in the Balkans because the primary conflict is not interethnic, but intra-ethnic," Bancroft said. "Zukorlic's attempts to fuse religion and politics -- as epitomised by the recent elections to the Bosniak national minority council -- pose a challenge to the stability of the region." 
 SETimes correspondent Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report. 
