05/03/2007
By Gabriela Preda for Southeast European Times – 05/03/07
The regional energy market is experiencing busy times as many Southeastern European countries have decided to push ahead with long-debated oil transport projects -- aiming to bring Caspian oil or even gas to the West. At least three pipelines have started to refuel dreams in the region of oil riches that would eventually boost local economies. 
None of the projects has received the EU's unconditional support, however. Unofficially, various EU experts fear that some pipelines would eventually affect the Union's relations with Russia. Nevertheless, it's no secret that Brussels is watching the race to determine which project will operate first and act as a liaison with the rich Caspian seaports believed to be sitting on trillions of dollars in untapped oil. Oil experts suspect that Moscow will ultimately have the final say on the projects, as it will be mainly Russia's oil that will be pumped. Various energy-hungry EU member states have expressed concern, given Russia's regular halting of oil exports. 
While Brussels remains in standby mode, competition gets tougher every month on the Southeast European oil transport market. The first move became public in late January, when Romania announced a fresh start for the Pan European Oil Pipeline (PEOP). It would link the Romanian Black Sea port of Constanta with the Italian port of Trieste, with involvement by Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia. The pipeline would dodge Russian control of the regional energy market and would contribute substantially to a lower European dependency on Russian and Middle Eastern oil. 
The announcement was made during Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi's visit to Bucharest. He officially reiterated Rome's support for the 1,319km pipeline. According to its promoters, the PEOP has "enormous" advantages over its competitors -- at least twice the capacity with an existing "pipe-to-pipe" connection to a line that crosses the Alps in Trieste. 
The project has been on hold for years, mainly due to the lack of consensus among the various states -- especially on the tariffs for transportation. In the initial feasibility study, the project was budgeted at $2.4 billion. Talks started in 1994, but the political framework and regional conflicts prevented much progress. Moreover, the project has faced regular delays based on funding shortages and poor decisions, according to Italian newspaper Il Piccolo. 
Rome and Bucharest seem recently to have put aside the past, and have clearly expressed a keen interest in advancing the project. The PEOP has become a key target for Romania's energy policy, in light of more advanced rival projects, all crossing the Balkans and all, in theory, approved by Russia. 
One of the PEOP's main competitors is the Burgas-Alexandroupoli pipeline that would carry Russian oil from Bulgaria's Black Sea coast to a Greek port in the northeast Aegean. According to Greek news agency ANA, the 285km pipeline has an estimated investment cost of $800m and is expected to have an initial annual capacity of 35 million tonnes of oil. 
After years of delays, the main backers -- Greece, Russia and Bulgaria -- have finally decided to act. A tri-partite working group recently met in Burgas, Bulgaria and finalised the initial interstate agreement on construction of the pipeline. 
Russian President Vladimir Putin has called on Greece and Bulgaria to reach a final agreement as soon as possible. "If the Bulgarian and Greek partners fail to reach accord, we will have to boost our exports through the territory of other countries," Putin said during his annual news conference on February 2nd "Moreover, as Bulgaria and Greece are EU members, the EU should be highly interested in the implementation of this project," Putin said. 
According to various experts, Moscow is getting nervous not only because of the latest moves regarding the PEOP, but also because Russia had been excluded as the guarantor of supplies for a third rival pipeline in the region -- the AMBO project, linking Bulgaria, Macedonia and Albania. According to an accord signed in late January in Skopje, the third pipeline aims to carry oil from the Caspian region to the Black Sea port of Burgas in Bulgaria, and then through Macedonia to the Mediterranean port of Vlore in Albania. After years of slow work, optimistic scenarios suggest the 850km pipeline, with a capacity of 35 million metric tonnes per year and a cost of around $1.3 billion, may be ready by the end of the decade. 
