06/05/2008
(AFP, DPA, Fena, Dnevni Avaz, Nezavisne Novine - 05/05/08; Fena -- 24/04/08 - 25/04/08)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Prime Minister Nikola Spiric asked parliament Monday (May 5th) to sack Foreign Minister Sven Alkalaj and two junior government members, who have been banned from public office for four years, but are refusing to resign. 
 Last month, the BiH Central Election Commission (CEC) ruled that Alkalaj, Deputy Defence Minister Igor Crnadak and Deputy Civil Affairs Minister Senad Sepic had violated the country's law on conflict of interest. It said the three were either personally, or through their close relatives, linked to companies doing business with state institutions. 
In its ruling, handed down on April 24th, the commission said that while serving as foreign minister, Alkalaj was a member of an insurance company whose dealings with the BiH authorities exceeded 5 2,500 euros a year. 
Crnadak was found to have breached the law because his father was the head of the Banja Luka-based Incel Holding, and Sepic because his father-in-law was the director of the Basbunar public company in Travnik. 
Dismissing the CEC's decision as politically motivated, Alkalaj claimed that it was part of a partisan political campaign against him. He also insisted that there was no factual or legal basis for the commission's accusations against him, and that being a member of the insurance company's managing board did not in itself imply a violation of the law. Moreover, he said he had left that post prior to the commission's decision. 
"As a minister, I have gained no material use for I have given up all income from membership at the managing board," Alkalaj told reporters at a news conference in Sarajevo on April 25th, announcing his refusal to step down. 
He and the two deputy ministers have lodged court appeals against the CEC's decision. 
Spiric told reporters Monday that it was his legal obligation to initiate the procedure for the three officials' dismissal, after the electoral commission made its ruling. It is up to lawmakers now to decide whether they should be sacked. 
The prime minister also stressed that no one should be placed above the law, especially in a country that is hoping to join EU and NATO one day. "It is very important that BiH is built as a legal state," the prime minister said. 
"I expect the parliament to offer a definite solution in this case," he said. "If they agree to replace the minister and two deputy ministers, then I expect the leading political parties to suggest new candidates as soon as possible." 
