28/09/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 28/09/04
Albania continues to grapple with the problem of missing and exploited children, one which has plagued the country during its transitional phase. The attorney general's office says it working to bring offenders to justice. 
"Prosecutors have handled 366 cases, with 417 accused persons," says Agim Neza, an aide to the attorney general. "Out of them, 21 cases have been opened for human trafficking, ten for child trafficking, 161 for illegal border crossing, and 172 for trafficking of women, prostitution and misuse. The courts have given sentences of up to 20 years of imprisonment." 
Albania's police report that 31 cases have been filed by parents of missing children since 1998. However, there are many other cases in which the parents do not contact police, and some in which the parents themselves are involved in the trafficking -- exchanging their own children for money or goods. 
Meanwhile, Albania's ombudsman, Ermir Dobjani, has had an intensive correspondence with his Greek counterpart, Nikiforos Diamandouros. According to official data, from 1998 to 2002, nearly 500 children disappeared from Athens' Aghia Varvara centre, an institution for the rehabilitation of young victims of human trafficking. 
According to a report published earlier this year by the aid organisation Terres des Hommes, Greece is a frequent destination for trafficked children from Albania -- especially for children from the cities of Tirana, Elbasan, Pogradec and Korca. "These cities are the geographical roads towards the Greek border, or indirectly towards Macedonia," the organisation said. 
Another trafficking route links Tirana with Durres, Berat, Fier and Vlora, ending on the Italian coasts. 
 In September 2003, Italian police revealed that an elderly Italian couple had been questioned for allegedly buying an Albanian boy who had been sold in exchange for a TV set. The toddler's impoverished parents have admitted to trading the child to an Albanian gang of smugglers. The boy, the youngest of five, was taken to Italy where he was allegedly sold to the couple for 5,000 euros. 
According to the Terres des Hommes report, families that are extremely poor, illiterate or troubled make up the three categories that feed human trafficking networks in Albania. 
"Recruited victims are children who come from families that face big financial problems, families with a low level of education, divorced families," the study said 
