14/06/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 14/06/13
In an operation that has been hailed as a breakthrough in targeting corruption within the police sector, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) authorities recently broke up an animal smuggling ring that involved 12 police officers. 
The suspects smuggled cattle and sheep into BiH from neighbouring Serbia for years, making millions of euros in profit. The action was carried out in the area of Zvornik, Bratunac and Srebrenica, all border areas with Serbia. 
"I can confirm that the commander of the border police unit in charge of Zvornik is arrested, five leaders of the sector, one shift leader and one border policeman. This is a continuation of the work of the border police when it comes to fighting corruption in our own lines," Vinko Dumancic, head of the BiH Border Police, told SETimes. 
In 2009, BiH Border Police formed a unit with their colleagues from Serbia and have been jointly patroling the border between the two countries. 
Gojko Vasic, chief of the Republika Srpska police department, said that the police searched 24 locations and arrested 24 people, including four RS police officers. 
"The goal of these activities is to prevent the smuggling of animals, but also the prevention of corruption in the police ranks," Vasic told SETimes. 
The BiH's Prosecution Office said it will take further steps after it questions the suspects. 
Police seized about 300 sheep, 80 cows, two boats, three vehicles designed specifically for the transport of cattle, money, weapons and ammunition. 
Officials didn't specify the financial damage, but noted that they are talking about millions of euros. 
Cattle and agriculture producers noted that the problem of smuggling is a long-standing issue that has caused damages to domestic producers. 
Producers said the channels smugglers use to enter BiH are usually small village roads, illegal bridges on the rivers and forest paths. 
"I welcome this action of the BiH's police agencies and I call the authorities to continue to rigorously cleaning their lines. We are suffering great damages because smuggled cattle is more cheaper than domestic. They don't pay taxes and people are buying cheaper products, of course," Sead Jelec, secretary-general of the Cattle and Agriculture Producers Association of BiH, told SETimes. 
Police agencies in BiH have increased the crackdown on corruption against state institutions and political officials in the past few months. 
In mid-April, the State Investigation and Protection Agency organised anti-corruption actions against 19 officials, including Federation of BiH President Zivko Budimir. The officials are accused of taking bribes and abusing their power. 
Days after Budimir's arrest, prosecutor filed criminal charges against FBiH Deputy Prime Minister Jerko Ivankovic-Lijanovic and 57 others for corruption and organised crime. 
"These investigations represent strong evidence that corruption is deeply rooted in the official policy of BiH and has an unbreakable bond with politicians and officials," Ivana Korajlic, spokeswoman for Transparency International of BiH, told SETimes. 
Should the border police be investigated for additional corruption? Tell us what you think in the comments. 
