26/01/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 26/01/06
Serbia moved during 2005 to take measures against the ongoing problem of violence against women and children, particularly in the home. It adopted and began to implement a new Family Law, which for the first time makes it possible to issue restraining orders against abusers or order them to move out of the household. 
The media coverage surrounding the law may have been almost as significant as the law itself, since it fostered public discussion of an issue that is all too often kept behind closed doors. According to a report by Stop Violence Against Women, it signalled that family violence would no longer be treated simply as a "private issue". 
Although the Family Law may have been a step in the right direction, some say it has had little real impact so far. 
 "Women who are victims of violence and who come to our safe house will tell you that they expected a lot more from this law," says Vesna Stanojevic, co-ordinator of the Counseling Office Against Family Violence. "They simply expected to remain in the family home, the way the law stipulates, and that the abuser will be moved out. [But] neither is the law being enforced in the way it should be, nor are court orders being executed. We still do not have an example of an abusive husband being moved out of a house, while the victim has been moved in," she adds. 
At the same time, existing homes for battered women and children are full and there is a need for such facilities in every large city in Serbia. The safe houses that do exist have not received adequate funding. It is only due to financial help from foreign companies and organisations that they are able to continue their operations. 
Along with new homes for battered women and enforcement of current laws, a more fundamental change in social attitudes is necessary, say anti-violence advocates. In particular, they say, it would make a real difference if victims began to speak out. According to the Counseling Office Against Family Violence, every third woman in Serbia conceals from family and friends the fact that she is the victim of psychological, physical or sexual abuse. Abused women tend to keep quiet out of shame. They are embarrassed at the idea of sharing what is happening in their private lives. 
Researchers say this silence simply adds to the problem. "Abusers are abusive especially because of this invisibility and anonymity," social psychologist Dragan Popadic says."Research indicates that it is not just abusers, but ordinary people in everyday situations that are far less likely to act aggressively and to be prone to violence against others in situations where they are no longer invisible or protected by anonymity." 
