11/04/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in the Central Mediterranean -- 11/04/05
Bosnia and Herzegovina Prime Minister Adnan Terzic paid a visit to the USS Harry S. Truman (CVN 75) in the Central Mediterranean on 29 March. The nuclear-powered aircraft carrier is 1,096 ft long, displaces 97,000 tonnes of water and can accommodate a crew of more than 5,200. 
The visit was organised by US Ambassador to BiH Douglas McElhaney. Along with Terzic, the delegation included BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic, deputy speakers of the BiH House of Representatives Martin Raguz and Nikola Spiric, President of the BiH Court Meddzida Kreso, Chief of Joint Staff Lieutenant General Sifet Podzic and the President of the Party of Independent Social Democrats Milorad Dodik. 
 The BiH delegation was welcomed by Commander of Carrier Strike Group Ten (CSG 10) Rear Admiral Michael C. Tracy and USS Truman Commanding Officer Captain James P. Gigliotti. In a little less than three hours, they witnessed the basic capabilities of the US fleet's "supercarrier" and its embarked Carrier Air Wing Three (CVW 3). The wing consists of approximately 70 aircraft from eight US Navy squadrons and one US Marine squadron. The commander of the Carrier Air Wing is Captain Patrick F. Rainey, an experienced F/A-18 fighter pilot with more than 5,100 flight hours and 850 carrier arrested landings in his career. 
Apart from regular catapult launches and recovery of the aircraft on the 4.5 acre flight deck, the BiH delegation got the opportunity to observe a special air combat presentation over the ship, 120 miles off Sicily. Sailors wearing different coloured jerseys and ear-protecting cranials gathered on the port side of the deck to watch the show. The members of the BiH delegation stood at the air control platform called "Vultures Row" while F-14 and F/A-18 fighters and a S-3B sea control jet performed low-level fly-bys, dropped bombs and fired at training targets in the sea. An electronic warfare EA-6B jet and early warning/air control E-2C plane flew low over the ship while SH-60 helicopters performed sea rescue and troop insertion demonstrations. 
 Had Balkan leaders witnessed such a presentation at the beginning of the 1990s, the conflict in BiH might never have taken place, Terzic said. 
Tracey and Gigliotti then invited the BiH guests to the official cabin, where gifts were presented and discussions held about the ship's operations. US aircraft carriers participated in international exercises together with more that 30 foreign countries around the globe last year, Tracey said, noting that the ship had just returned from an operation in support of Iraqi elections. 
 "We highly appreciate the fact that BiH will also participate in the peace-support operation in Iraq," he said, recalling the fact that BiH is preparing 36 soldiers for a unit that would be assigned to remove unexploded ordnance and weapons as part of Coalition forces there. 
 Delegation members said they were very impressed by their catapult launch in the C-2 carrier onboard deliver propeller aircraft that took them back to the US Naval Air Station Sigonella at Sicily. Particularly unforgettable, though, was their landing on the ship. As the C-2 lowered its hook and caught one of four wires stretched over the deck landing spot, the plane went from 105mph to a complete stop in just two seconds. 
Although the Croatian and Slovenian heads of states also received invitations before their countries joined NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme several years ago, McElhaney told SE Times that the BiH delegation's visit was not intended to imply any particular message. 
"I recently heard that the USS Truman is in the Mediterranean, having just crossed the Red Sea on its way from the operations in the Persian Gulf," he said. "I then asked the Commander of the Sixth Fleet whether it would be possible to bring a BiH delegation to the ship. I just wanted to show to representatives of the BiH government how the ship performs as part of the NATO Alliance." 
"The visit to a large aircraft carrier is not just political event but also brings some human feelings," Terzic said after the trip. "I believe that there is no alternative to our future membership in NATO, and in PfP before that." 
"This was definitely a big and important experience for me," Radovanovic said. "In particular, we were able to see some of NATO's potential." 
 Two years ago, the BiH presidency officially announced its determination to join the PfP, and authorities have embarked on fulfilling the required defence reforms. But the main political precondition -- full co-operation with the International Crime Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia -- still has not been fully met. 
The Harry S Truman CSG, consisting of the USS Barry (DDG 52) and USS Mason (DDG 87) destroyers, the USS Monterey (CG 61) cruiser, the USNS Arctic (T-AOE 8) supply ship, the USS Albuquerque (SSN 706) attack submarine and aircraft from the embarked CVW 3, began its second deployment on 13 October in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom and the global war on terrorism. The ships are part of the US Atlantic Fleet and are homeported in Norfolk, Virginia. 
