15/05/2007
(B92 -15/05/07; AFP, AP, DPA, RFE/RL, HINA, AKI, Beta, B92 - 14/05/07)
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Monday (May 14th) that Brussels stands ready to resume talks with Serbia if its new government takes steps to co-operate fully with the UN war crimes tribunal and pushes ahead with economic reforms. 
"We can revitalise Serbia's EU perspective immediately," the commissioner said on the sidelines of an EU foreign ministers' meeting in Brussels. 
Parliament is expected to endorse the new coalition cabinet Tuesday evening, only hours before the constitutional deadline. According to Belgrade-based Radio B92, Rehn will arrive in the Serbian capital Wednesday to meet the new 25-member government, which will be led by incumbent Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica of the Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS). 
Kostunica's previous adminstration did not include the Democratic Party (DP), led by President Boris Tadic, and instead relied on parliamentary support from the late Slobodan Milosevic's Socialists. The new DSS-DP-G17 government, however, has a combined 130 seats in Parliament, enough to pass the reforms needed for the country's progress towards EU integration. 
"We believe that not only will this government take up office, it will act effectively and get to work on necessary reforms," German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier, whose country holds the rotating EU presidency, said in Brussels on Monday. 
He also reiterated the promise the EU made earlier this year, to keep its doors open to Serbia if it meets the bloc's requirement for full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal, including the arrest and handover of indictees. 
The Union suspended its talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Belgrade in May 2006 after Serbian authorities failed to arrest and extradite former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic to The Hague, as promised. 
As part of the coalition deal, Tadic, who has pledged to take quick steps to improve his country's relations with the tribunal, will head a new panel -- the National Security Council -- which would co-ordinate the work of all security and intelligence services. 
His party also will control the military services, while the DSS will control the police. Tadic and Kostunica have also agreed that Serbia's intelligence agency BIA -- an institution with a key role in relations with The Hague tribunal -- will be headed by a person who does not belong to any political party. 
"I trust the leaders of Serbia's democratic forces now realise their responsibility and choose a European future for Serbia, instead of letting the country fall back to its nationalist past," Rehn said, one day after Tomislav Nikolic, the deputy leader of the ultranationalist Serbian Radical Party, resigned as parliament speaker. 
According to reports, Rehn's expected visit to Belgrade on Wednesday will coincide with the signing in Brussels of a visa facilitation agreement between Serbia and the EU, which was initially scheduled to take place last week. 
