11/04/2007
(HINA - 11/04/07; AP, UPI, DPA, Makfax, The White House, Washington File, US Department of State - 10/04/07)
US President George W. Bush has signed into law a bill reaffirming his country's support for Albania, Croatia, Georgia, Macedonia and Ukraine's NATO accession, the White House said in a statement Tuesday (April 10th). The NATO Freedom Consolidation Act of 2007 also opens the door for the extension of new US military assistance to the five countries during fiscal year 2008. 
At its November 2006 summit in Riga, the Alliance made clear that countries that have met the political and military requirements for membership could expect to be invited to join the 26-nation pact during its 2008 summit. 
Albania, Croatia and Macedonia, which signed the US-backed Adriatic Charter in May 2003 and have been participating in NATO's Membership Action Plan (MAP) since 2002, have contributed a total of 300 troops to the Alliance-led International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. 
NATO began intensified dialogue on membership with Ukraine and Georgia in 2005 and 2006, respectively, but neither has been granted a MAP yet. Georgia has contributed 850 troops to the US-led Multinational Force-Iraq and is planning to send an additional 1,550 soldiers, while Ukraine completed its role in the operation in December 2005. 
"Contingent upon their continued implementation of democratic, defence, and economic reform, and their willingness and ability to meet the responsibilities of membership in NATO and a clear expression of national intent to do so, Congress calls for the timely admission of Albania, Croatia, Georgia, Macedonia, and Ukraine to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation to promote security and stability in Europe," the NATO Freedom Consolidation Act of 2007 reads. 
The legislation, introduced on February 6th by Indiana Senator Richard Lugar, ranking Republican on the Foreign Relations Committee, was approved by the Senate on March 16th and by the House of Representatives on March 26th. It entered into force following Bush's approval on Monday. 
"Since the end of the Cold War, NATO has been evolving to meet the new security needs of the 21st century," Lugar said as he introduced the act. "If NATO is to continue to be the pre-eminent security Alliance and serve the defence interests of its membership, it must continue to evolve and that evolution must include enlargement." 
As the Senate approved the legislation, Lugar praised Albania, Croatia and Macedonia for their progress in implementing a number of NATO-required democratic, economic and military reforms. 
"I believe that eventual NATO membership for these five countries would be a success for Europe, NATO, and the United States by continuing to extend the zone of peace and security," the senator said. 
The three Balkan countries and the two former Soviet republics will now be eligible to receive up to $42m in aid under the NATO Participation Act of 1994, a law created to facilitate US support for NATO membership, as well as security assistance to be allocated under the 2008 budget, the Washington File reported on Tuesday. 
Downplaying Russian security concerns over Georgia and Ukraine's possible accession to NATO, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice says that Moscow should instead support its neighbours' membership bids. 
"We believe very strongly that a network of strong democratic, independent states that are growing and prospering and therefore, stable are going to be beneficial to Russia, not harmful to Russia," she told a group of foreign journalists Tuesday. 
