05/01/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/01/06
The Kosovo Police Service (KPS) on Tuesday (3 January) arrested four young people from the village of Mirusha in Maliseva municipality. According to police, the detainees were among a crowd that stoned a UN bus transporting a group of 55 Serbs to Mitrovica. 
"The incident took place at 8:45 this morning and there were no injuries," said police spokesperson Fatmir Gjurgjeali. 
Malisheva Deputy Mayor Ragip Begaj condemned the attack. "We do not need such incidents," he said, stressing that violence is detrimental to the process of resolving Kosovo's status. 
Serbs from the municipality of Rahoveci take the bus to Mitrovica for shopping twice a week. Violeta Krstic, who is in charge of the trips, said it was not the first time the bus had been stoned. "We were also attacked in the end of December," she said. 
The incident is the latest in a string of criminal acts that have cast a shadow over security in the province as the status negotiations get under way. Kosovo's police insist that crime overall is down and that Kosovo is "calm". But the attacks continue to rattle nerves and raise questions about the ability of local authorities to keep the peace. 
In December, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen ordered UN forces to step up police patrols and man additional checkpoints, following a grenade attack on a bus near the town of Prizren. 
Such incidents "demonstrate that, during the status process which has just begun, isolated individuals or groups who do not have Kosovo's best interests in mind may attempt to disrupt Kosovo's way forward for their own ulterior motives," Reuters quoted Jessen-Petersen as saying in a statement. 
According to UNMIK Police Commissioner Kai Vitrup, the security situation in Kosovo has deteriorated. He cited "a series of terrorist attacks on cars and policemen of UNMIK and the KPS". 
On 14 December, a Romanian Special Police Unit serving under UNMIK came under fire as it responded to an attempted prison outbreak in western Kosovo. Three people were injured and two vehicles were hit by gunfire. 
