15/09/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/09/11
The agreement reached by KFOR calmed the situation after Kosovo police intervened at border gates in in the North in July. As the agreement ends Thursday (September 15th), Pristina expects to redeploy its customs officers and border police on the northern border with Serbia. 
ICG Director for the Balkans Marko Prelec spoke with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku about the situation and what the outcome could mean for both countries. 
 SETimes: Has the situation in northern Kosovo changed since the July actions by the Kosovo police? 
 Marko Prelec: The situation has changed in that all outside Serbia now agree the status quo in northern Kosovo is untenable. Yet in other ways, it remains the same. Kosovo customs officials are no nearer the northern gates than they were before, and the northern Serbs are if anything even more determined to resist Pristina's authority. 
 SETimes: How do you evaluate Belgrade's position on this new situation? 
 Prelec: Belgrade does not appear to understand it has lost the game; it still seeks to return to the status quo before July 25th and, in the long term, to partition Kosovo. Neither is possible. The Serbian government needs a new strategy. Otherwise, it risks further deterioration, not only to its own interests but also to the safety of Serbs north of the Ibar. 
 SETimes: What do you expect to happen there now? 
 Prelec: Pristina has telegraphed its intentions to keep the pressure on the north in every way it can and further actions cannot be ruled out… The Kosovo government underestimates the depth of Serb resistance, which is almost universal in the north. Further actions can easily lead to an escalating cycle of violence and in the worst case, to reprisals against civilians by both sides. 
 SETimes: Do you believe the dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia will produce concrete results? 
 Prelec: If the dialogue survives the crisis in northern Kosovo… it should bring real benefits. Serbia has no long-term interest in making life difficult for Kosovo; it is only blocking Pristina to pressure it to give up its claims on the north. There are many things Belgrade can do at no cost to itself: opening up airspace to Kosovo, allowing free movement of persons and facilitating trade, unblocking Kosovo's participation in international forums. 
 SETimes: How do you see the future of Kosovo as a whole? 
 Prelec: In the long term, Kosovo will be in the EU, but it has a lot of work ahead. Europe is in deep crisis and will only take countries that are already economically responsible and prospering. 
 SETimes: What kind of offer/agreement would be expected from Belgrade regarding Kosovo? 
 Prelec: Belgrade should acknowledge the reality that the north is part of Kosovo and should stop opposing the Pristina government's attempts to implement the Ahtisaari Plan there. That plan offers Serbs broad autonomy and ties with Belgrade, and Pristina may offer even more if relations improve. 
 SETimes: How do you evaluate KFOR's position in Kosovo? 
 Prelec: NATO cannot responsibly reduce KFOR's strength until the situation in the north has stabilised. It is the only organisation with sufficient assets to respond simultaneously across the country. 
 SETimes: How much has the EU put at stake with EULEX, especially with the situation in the north? 
 Prelec: This is devastating to EULEX, and the mission may be damaged beyond repair. It has little real authority left in Kosovo. Yet there is still a need for a rule of law mission. Brussels must rethink EULEX. 
It can probably be reduced in size, especially its police component. On the other hand, Kosovo needs more judges and prosecutors, and EULEX can still play a critical role implementing the customs regime in northern Kosovo. 
