12/12/2006
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 12/12/06
Serbs are the second largest ethnic group and the largest ethnic minority in Kosovo. In 2000, it was estimated that there were between 126,000 and 140,000 Serbs living in Kosovo -- 7% of the province's population. The minority mostly lives in northern enclaves. 
Despite their numbers, many among the Kosovo Serbs are not ready for an independent Kosovo. Others think Kosovo will become a fully Albanian state with no recognition of minority rights. 
 "I remember the time when Serbia governed with Kosovo, I am a little bit nostalgic, because I am aware that this will not happen any more," said Dragan Lajic, who lives in Gracanica, a small town near Pristina. 
Lajic is not the only Serb with this opinion. His compatriot, Milan Kerstic, said it is time to decide what to do with Kosovo. "Belgrade should be very conscious about what it will do with Kosovo. I think that our leaders are not working like before the 1990s, because in that period they were more united," he said. 
Despite calls to play a constructive and integral political role, Kosovo Serb leaders have boycotted Kosovo institutions in order to protest the passive role assigned to them by the province's parliament. "We will return to the parliament only when we are sure that Albanians will not view us as mere ornament, but as a constructive part of the Kosovo institutions," said Oliver Ivanovic, a leading Serb politician and a member of the Kosovo parliament. 
 Bojan Milutinovic, a Kosovo journalist, says he has a good job in the province and he sees his future in Mitrovica. He is optimistic that Kosovo will be a democratic and multi-ethnic place, which will offer possibilities to all ethnic groups. "Maybe not now, but in a near future, Kosovo will be a better place to live," he said. 
Mira Samardjic, a high school student, said that Serbian literature is a part of the curriculum. "We have the same programme as Belgrade, Novi Pazar, and others," she said. She is happy with no curriculum changes. Mira's mother, however, is concerned that there are not enough Serb students in Kosovo schools, mostly because, she observed, some leave school in order to work and provide financial support. Unemployment is a problem in and around Mitrovica, and the Samardjic family, like many others, is affected by it. 
According to the UNHCR, the return of Kosovo Serbs to the province since 2000 has been slow. Only 15,600 minority returns have been registered -- out of the estimated 250,000 ethnic Serbs, Roma and others who left the province after the withdrawal of Serbian forces in 1999. There are still more than 220,000 displaced Kosovo Serbs and Roma -- more than 207,000 of them in Serbia and the rest in Montenegro. The return of ethnic minorities to Kosovo remains a challenge, since it is one of the 13 points required for implementation of standards by the Contact Group. 
Kosovo Albanians cautiously optimistic about the future
