17/11/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 17/11/10
Two months and ten days after the Islamic holy month of Ramadan, Muslims celebrate Eid-ul-Adha, a festival of sacrifice that calls on Muslims to unify around a common cause -- equality and brotherhood. 
Eid-ul-Adha falls during the time of hajj and commemorates the willingness of Abraham to sacrifice his son Ismail as an act of obedience to God before he intervenes to sacrifice a ram instead. 
Believers honour the dead and slaughter a sheep -- called a qurban -- to symbolise the sacrifice. Festivities in BiH are marked by gifts to children and full dinners for family and guests. 
Many Sarajevo residents who spoke to SETimes said that although they will continue to celebrate with family and friends as in years past, they will not slaughter the qurban. 
This year's Eid-al-Adha festivities in BIH coincide with an exhibition on manuscripts of the Qu'ran, organised by the Historical Archive of Sarajevo and hosted by the 16th century Kursumli Medresa, also known as Sarajevo's first higher school. 
Renowned Sarajevo Professor Esad Durakovic spoke at the opening ceremony last Friday (November 12th) and described the exhibition as "a testimony of continuity". 
"The Qu'ran offers an opportunity for interpretation both through its calligraphic manuscripts as well as book binding methods," he explained. 
The exhibition features major manuscripts of Islam's holy book as well as samples of Arabic calligraphy. Among the highlights is a Qu'ran copy dating back to the 14th or 15th century. 
Also on display are seals of Bosnian and Herzegovinian governors found on decrees and orders from the period between 1463 and 1807. They are permanently stored at the Dubrovnik State Archives but have been brought to Sarajevo for the current exhibition, largely through the efforts of Dubrovnik-based archivist Vesna Mijovic. 
The seals mainly belong to the governors of the Bosnian pashaluk (Ottoman district), while a smaller number originate from the Herzegovinian sanjak, a subdivision of the Bosnian pashaluk. 
"This exhibition, although it was targeted to fit Eid-ul-Adha, exceeds its original purpose," says Haris Zaimovic of the Sarajevo Historical Archive. "It represents a longer-term gift to Sarajevo, pointing out its historical message." 
Bosnia encountered Islam long before it fell under Ottoman rule, as Ottoman soldiers were stationed permanently along the borders of the medieval Bosnian Kingdom. 
The Ottoman Empire ruled Bosnia from 1463 to 1878 before Austrian rule replaced it. Those 415 years left a major impact on the general life of the Bosnian population. 
