24/04/2009
(BBC, Euronews, FT - 24/04/09; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, AKI, Beta, B92 - 23/04/09)
The special war crimes court in Belgrade on Thursday (April 23rd) convicted four former police officers of killing 48 ethnic Albanians during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo and sentenced them to a total of 68 years in prison. 
Radojko Repanovic, a former police commander in the town of Suva Reka, about 60km southeast of Pristina, and another local police officer, Sladjan Cukaric, each received the maximum of 20 years in prison. The other two former officers, Miroslav Petkovic and Milorad Nisavic, face terms of 15 years and 13 years, respectively. 
"They were found guilty of committing war crimes against civilians," Judge Vinka Beraha Nikicevic said, as she read out the verdict. 
But the three other defendants facing charges in the 1999 Suva Reka massacre -- Radoslav Mitrovic, Nenad Jovanovic and Zoran Petkovic -- were acquitted. Mitrovic, a former special police unit commander and the first defendant whom police arrested, initially faced charges of ordering the killings. 
All but two of the victims of the massacre belonged to the same family. Among them were two infants, a pregnant woman and a 100-year-old woman, the AP reported citing the verdict. On March 26th 1999, the Serb police officers rounded up members of the Berisha family, killing them with gunfire and hand grenades. 
Shureta Berisha, who survived by feigning death and jumping off the truck carrying the corpses, was among more than 100 witnesses who testified. 
The bodies of the Suva Reka victims were among more than 800 that Serbian security forces later transported to Serbia and reburied in two mass graves there. 
 Searchers found these graves in 2001, just a few months after the arrest of former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic. 
Reports at the time said many of the bodies unearthed at the two sites showed signs of torture and violent death. 
The Serb war crimes prosecutors said they would appeal, expressing particular dismay at Mitrovic's acquittal. "We cannot be satisfied with the verdict," prosecution spokesman Bruno Vekaric said. "Justice has not been carried out." 
Welcoming the Belgrade court's ruling, officials in Kosovo called on Serbia to bring to justice all perpetrators of war crimes committed against ethnic Albanians during the 1998-1999 conflict. 
 "We welcome every court and justice decision that will shed light [on] the atrocities committed in Kosovo during the war," Kosovo government spokesman Memli Krasniqi said on Thursday. "Nevertheless, we feel that this should not cease with one case." 
