12/10/2004
(Washington Post, The New York Times - 12/10/04; AP, Reuters, AFP, VOA, American Forces Press Service, Rompres - 11/10/04)
Kicking off a visit to Romania on Monday (11 October), US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld visited a Black Sea air base reportedly being considered for use by the US military. While a final decision could be months away, a team of US experts is likely to visit Romania later this year to discuss the issue in greater detail. 
Accompanied by Defence Minister Ioan Mircea Pascu, Rumsfeld visited the Mihail Kogalniceanu air base near the port of Constanta. He also toured a nearby army installation, currently being used by a Romanian infantry brigade but likely vacated soon. 
Kogalniceanu served as a temporary base for as many as 3,500 US military personnel during preparations for the start of the campaign in Iraq in early 2003. About 7,000 US combat troops were reportedly flown through the air base on their way to northern Iraq in the early stages of the war. 
In the face of new realities, US President George W. Bush announced a change in US military policy earlier this year, favouring smaller training facilities and quick deployments to crisis areas, rather than large permanent bases such as those currently maintained in Western Europe. Under this plan, up to 70,000 US troops are to be relocated from Europe and Asia over the next ten years. 
"The idea with our new global posture is to encircle hot spots where insurgents take sanctuary," one US official was quoted as saying Monday. 
Speaking on condition of anonymity, a senior US defence official said Romania's offer would be given serious consideration, as US funding worth over $3m has already been spent on upgrading the Kogalniceanu air base. 
"If we were to come here, we could use it as a substantial training range," the Washington Post quoted the official as saying. Facilities in Bulgaria, he added, would likely be packaged with the two bases Romania is offering to forge a strong US presence in Eastern Europe. 
Any renewed US military presence at the Kogalniceanu air base, or at the adjacent Romanian army base, would not entail a large military contingent, an official said, but would mostly involve the rotation of troops in and out of the facility for joint training exercises. 
Experts from the US Defence and State Departments are expected to visit Romania and Bulgaria possibly in November "to get down to the nuts and bolts of what we really want to do," The New York Times quoted a senior defence official as saying. 
Asked if he hoped that an arrangement would be reached, Pascu said: "Of course, I hope so, you know. But it's not in our hands." 
While in Romania, Rumsfeld is to meet senior officials, including President Ion Iliescu and Prime Minister Adrian Nastase, before attending an informal two-day meeting of NATO defence ministers. 
Rumsfeld arrived in the country after a brief visit to Macedonia, where he warned that a referendum on recently adopted decentralisation laws presents a "clear choice between a future with NATO, in which stability and economic growth can flourish, or a return to the past". He also signed an agreement on co-operation with Macedonia in preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Skopje will receive $258,000 in equipment and training under the deal. 
