14/01/2010
By Esra Erduran for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 14/01/10
Allegations that two members of the Turkish military's Special Forces Command were planning to kill Deputy Prime Minister Bulent Arinc has sparked heated debate about a possible confrontation between the Turkish ruling party and the military. 
While the exact intention of the suspects remains unclear -- and the military appears to be ceding authority to the government -- news reports are focused on the political fallout. 
Shortly after the detention of two officers -- identified only as Major Ibrahim G and Colonel Erkan Yilmaz B -- political circles feared a confrontation not only between the military and the government but also the judiciary. 
Police said they have information that both officers found driving around Arinc's house were planning to kill him and possessed maps and an exact address of the politician's home. 
"The current situation does not necessarily mean it was an assassination attempt; the speculation may be exaggerated," said Arinc, a founding member of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP). 
"I want to believe with all my heart that Turkey's most honourable, respected and disciplined institution does not have people who could plot such a thing against a deputy prime minister." 
Local media reports speculate that in addition to Arinc, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and President Abdullah Gul were also under surveillance by the military. 
After the news about Arinc broke, Chief of General Staff General Ilker Basbug said certain circles in the country were conducting a "psychological war" against the military. 
Last month, Basbug ordered a secret archive opened in the investigation of a judge. The move was seen as an acknowledgement of more civilian control of the armed forces, which has taken control of the government three times in the nation's history. 
The military is viewed as the main defender of secular rule, a role it has played since the death in 1938 of the nation's founder and former army officer, Mustfa Kemal Ataturk. As the country lobbies for EU membership, the military has been urged to reduce its influence in politics. 
Since the AKP came to power, the government and the military have differed on many issues, including mandatory wearing of head scarves for women. 
The governing party defines itself as conservative and democratic, but secular segments of Turkey are skeptical. The AKP was founded on remnants of the Virtue Party and the Welfare Party, both of which were shut down by the Constitutional Court for fostering religious activity. 
The conflict between these top institutions reached a peak with the ongoing case against an ultra-nationalist, secularist group publicly known as Ergenekon, whose members are on trial for allegedly trying to topple the government. 
During the Ergenekon probe, about 200 people, including military officers, lawyers and academics, have been arrested. 
Turkish daily Radikal columnist Murat Yetkin said the conflict is "crystal clear", despite the government's attempts to downplay it. Yetkin argues that the mere fact officials are ruling out any conflict is the true measure of the problem. 
