27/02/2009
(DPA, VOA, Euronews, Blic - 27/02/09; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, AKI, BBC, International Herald Tribune, Telegraph, Beta, B92, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, UN News Centre - 26/02/09)
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) acquitted on Thursday (February 26th) former Serbian President Milan Milutinovic of war crimes committed in Kosovo during the first half of 1999, setting him free. 
 However, it sentenced five former senior Yugoslav and Serbian officials to a total of 96 years in prison. 
Milutinovic, former Yugoslav Deputy Prime Minister Nikola Sainovic, Yugoslav Army generals Nebojsa Pavkovic and Vladimir Lazarevic, Chief of the General Staff Dragoljub Ojdanic and Serbian police general Sreten Lukic all faced four charges of crimes against humanity and one charge of violations of the laws and customs of war. 
UN prosecutors accused the six of participation in a joint criminal enterprise, whose purpose was to modify "the ethnic balance in Kosovo in order to ensure continued Serbian control over the province". 
 "Forces of the Former Republic of Yugoslavia and Serbia systematically shelled towns and villages, burned homes and farms, damaged and destroyed Kosovo Albanian cultural and religious institutions, murdered Kosovo Albanian civilians and other persons taking no active part in the hostilities, and sexually assaulted Kosovo Albanian women," prosecutors alleged. 
Milutinovic, 66, served as Serbian president from December 1997 to December 2002. A close ally of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, he surrendered voluntarily to the UN tribunal in January 2003. 
Presiding Judge Iain Bonomy of Scotland, in acquitting Milutinovic, said that in practice "it was Milosevic ... who exercised actual command authority". 
The judgment issued 22-year sentences to Sainovic, Pavkovic and Lukic for participation in the deportation of nearly 800,000 Kosovo Albanian civilians and the murders of hundreds of others. 
The court convicted Lazarevic and Ojdanic of aiding and abetting the commission of deportations and forcible transfers of Kosovo Albanians. Each received a 15-year sentence. 
All five men found guilty will receive credit for time served. They all reportedly plan to appeal. 
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, on a trip to the United States to meet Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, avowed "full trust" in the court but added, "Enormous crimes ... took place in Kosovo, in Bosnia, and Croatia." 
For the families of 2,000 missing Kosovo citizens, "the only spiritual thing that would help them to feel better would be justice for those who committed the crimes," he added. 
Many Serbian officials criticised Thursday's verdict, saying it would only strengthen the perception in their country of an anti-Serb bias in the ICTY. 
"It is inevitable that this verdict will be compared to the acquittal of Ramush Haradinaj," Rasim Ljajic, the head of Serbia's council for co-operation with the ICTY, commented. 
Vuk Draskovic, the leader of the Serbian Renewal Movement, however, said the verdict was not "against Serbia and the Serbian people". 
