23/08/2012
By Biljana Lajmanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 23/08/12
According to the official data issued by the Macedonian State Statistics Agency, the overall value of building activities abroad by Macedonian companies in the first six months of 2012 is estimated to be less than 2.5 million euros -- a drop of 85.2 percent compared to the same period last year. 
Another huge decline has been recorded for future contracted activities, companies have arranged agreements worth 4.5 million euros, 83.6 percent less compared to the first half of 2011. 
The Union of Macedonian Construction Workers finds these numbers alarming, and said if the trend continues, many companies will be forced to reduce their work force. 
There are more than 7,000 construction companies working in Macedonia, far exceeding the number needed to meet the country's demand for construction. Many of the companies make the majority of their profits from jobs abroad. 
"Luckily, this huge drop in construction activities abroad has been partially amortised for now in Macedonia [through] a strong investment cycle in the country as a result of the Skopje 2014 project. But we don't know how long will this last," Pavel Trendafilov, president of the Union of Construction Workers, told SETimes. 
"In addition to this, as a result of the Arab Spring we lost the Arab countries where we have worked for years as a part of the former Yugoslavia and where we had good name as a quality construction industry," Nikola Velkovski, president of the Association of Construction Companies in the Macedonian Chamber of Commerce, told SETimes. 
"Recently, at foreign biddings there are companies with cheap work forces from the Middle East and Asia, and we have problems competing with them. Also, as builders are divided in all different countries in the region, we are too small and too weak to be competitive at international markets," Velkovski said. 
In many of the other countries in the region, the situation is worse. 
Albanian building companies have not yet explored foreign market potential, but the economic crisis has caused decrease in their domestic activities, dropping new construction by 17.6 percent in the first four months of 2012. 
The statistics for the second trimester are expected to show a further drop. 
Due to the economic crisis, the demand in the real estate sector has also been decreasing, forcing the government to curtail capital spending. The lack of government action on unpaid invoices for public works is causing even bigger financial problems for the country's construction companies. 
"At the moment, there are round 180 million euros of unpaid invoices for construction companies for public works," Arben Ahmetaj, socialist MP, told SETimes. 
However, in Serbia, the situation seems reversed. 
There is a lot of work for Serbia's construction workers even in this time of crisis, and the value of works done by Serbian companies outside of their borders at the moment totals over $2 billion dollars, head of the Serbian Chamber of Commerce's Construction Committee, Goran Rodic, told SETimes. 
"There is work abroad, but not in the country. Companies such as Mostogradnja and Energoprojekt are very sought after abroad -- in Algeria, Russia, Kazakhstan, Azerbaijan, Morocco and Qatar," said Rodic. 
He claims the state is not trying to offer construction projects to domestic firms, but to foreign companies. 
"We asked for our companies to be the main carriers of work in Serbia, in order to obtain references. We also asked for the forming of a development bank for the sake of gaining guarantees for future projects. Those requests have so far fallen on deaf ears," Rodic said. 
"The world recognises us, while our country doesn't. I hope this new government will heed our request and form a development bank, which will provide us with guarantees based on which we'll be able to do our job, if not in Serbia than around the world," he said. 
Joining forces at national and regional level seems to be the only answer for now. The Association of Macedonian Construction Companies is hoping to form a consortium of Macedonian companies that will bid together at foreign tenders. The Macedonian builders also engage in partnerships with other companies from the region, attempting to secure joint projects. 
This strategy seems to be giving results. 
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development awarded the construction of a 37-kilometer long highway from Prnjavor to Doboj in Republika Srpska, to a consortium of Bosnia and Herzegovina's Intergral Engineering and their Macedonian partner Granit. The first portion of the planned highway is worth 180 million euros. 
 SETimes correspondent Jonilda Koci in Albania contributed to this article. 
