23/06/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 23/06/09
Top rafting teams from all over the world met at the Vrbas and Tara rivers in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) last month for the World Rafting Championship. 
The Vrbas and Tara are fast mountain rivers, with several white-water spots and pool drops. 
The competition was divided into four parts: downriver, sprint, head-to-head (H2H) and slalom, or a zigzag course. 
Team Canada took first place in the women's division out of 21 countries, while Japan and the Czech Republic finished second and third, respectively. 
"We did not expect gold, but we made it," said Helene D'Astous of the Canadian women's team. 
Brazil finished strong in the men's competition, beating out 31 national teams. Like their female counterparts, Japan snagged the silver, followed by the United Kingdom in third. 
"We succeeded in defending our world title that we earned two years ago," said Brazilian coach Jean-Claude Razel. 
"BiH was great experience for us. I believe that the spirit of rafting can make people with different religions and other differences come together," he added. 
Both BiH national teams finished in the middle of pack in the competition, which was organised by the Rafting Club "Kanjon" (canyon). 
Several thousand spectators attended the event in Banja Luka and in the town of Foca. 
"These seven days were wonderful," said Banja Luka Mayor Dragoljub Davidovic, who was on hand during the event. 
"We have really shown our rich diversity, and we will have this event in our hearts and minds for a long time to come. Everybody was a winner here -- the City of Banja Luka, the Republika Srpska and the state of Bosnia and Herzegovina, too." 
The beautiful countryside and the warmness of the locals painted a much different picture for participants, who may have only known about the country through news broadcasts that highlight its political and economic hardships. 
"We were particularly surprised by the colours of the rivers here. The canyon is beautiful and so are the surrounding mountains. But it is the people that I like the most," said D'Astous. 
BiH hosted the European Rafting Championship in 2005. 
