12/04/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 12/04/05
The Greek shipping industry is developing at a healthy pace. Last year, the biggest shipowners attempted to strengthen their position in the international arena by building new ships. The Greek commercial fleet, comprised of old ships, had about 20 per cent of the world market in 2003. With the shipping industry's sudden development in the last two years, ship owners decided to renew their fleet. 
There were 326 orders for new ships last year alone -- a total of 26.8 million dead-weight tonnage. The majority of orders were for tankers and bulk carriers, the markets that the Greeks are more prone to service, leaving out ships for niche markets like vehicle carriers, refrigerator vessels or multi-purpose ships. 
Every two days, a new ship is being paid for in full due to new business booked with multi-year contracts before the ships are even out of the shipyard. The industry brings in $20m a day in revenue. 
In the meantime, the Greeks are selling their old ships to smaller firms abroad that did not predict the rise of demand in time to order new vessels. Global demand for ships is high and as the shipyards struggle to service existing clients, many are left with no other option than to pay handsomely for some of the old vessels in the Greek fleet. 
With the new orders, the biggest shipowners in Greece -- the Tsakos family that holds Tsakos Energy Navigation -- will increase their fleet from 53 to 76. 
The demand in the industry is not only affecting the fleet sizes -- The Port of Piraeus is en route to becoming a fully modernised port. The plan envisions upgrades in hardware, software and procedures of the port. The aim of the European Commission (EC) is to build the infrastructure for a pan-European network of sea transport at the port that will compete, in terms of time and cost, with terrestrial transferring of goods. 
The new system will allow the port to reduce the amount of time a ship spends ashore for loading and unloading. It will also cut the cost of using port facilities for handling of goods. According to the EC, the programme will mark the start of a revolution in the shipping industry. The project will be presented in June and Piraeus is expected to be the first port in the Mediterranean to adopt the programme. 
At the base of the system, there is new loading and unloading machinery that automates these procedures, making them faster, cheaper and less error-prone. Older ships will not benefit as much from this because of their configuration -- a fact which further justifies the need to update the fleets. 
