29/06/2010
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 29/06/10
Nearly ten days after Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov visited Russia, excitement over the achieved Macedonian-Russian energy deal and new bilateral co-operation agreement is high. 
 "Macedonia and Russia always had friendly and co-operative relations. The signing of the agreement is a huge step forward in the mutual co-operation. It is also very helpful for the Macedonian energy status," Skopje resident Viktorija Mitrovska told SETimes. 
Ivanov met with Russian President Dmitri Medvedev in St Petersburg on June 17th, after discussing specific aspects of energy giant Gazprom's potential involvement in Macedonia with General-Director Alexey Miller. 
The net result of the meetings was an agreement to build an extension linking the South Stream pipeline to Macedonia by 2015; to build a gas network completely covering Macedonia's territory and needs; and to involve Russian firms in building several gas and thermo-electric power plants. 
After the meeting, Ivanov said that Gazprom's entry into Macedonia will make any energy-related uncertainty and instability a thing of the past. 
"Thus far, our country was not represented on any energy map, neither on Nabucco's nor any other. The situation now changes and that is most important, that we can be included in the global economic investments," said Ivanov. 
The South Stream link will reach Macedonia from the Black Sea and Romania through either Serbia or Bulgaria, and will continue further to Albania and Italy. With it, Macedonia obtains a stable source of energy and frees itself from energy dependency, which could affect the country's economy and even political stability. 
The Macedonian delegation submitted a draft Agreement for Friendship and Co-operation to their Russian counterparts, which now supersedes the 1988 Declaration for Friendship and Co-operation between Russia and Macedonia. 
 The new agreement serves as a political and legal framework for supporting and promoting bilateral relations, including energy ties. 
The document also regulates Russia's 60m-euro debt to Macedonia, which has lingered from the time of the former Yugoslavia. Construction of the gas network in Macedonia is expected to cost 300m euros, and the agreement stipulates the 60m euros owed to Macedonia will be applied to that project, while Macedonia will invest about 14m euros. 
Finance Minister Zoran Stavrevski signed the agreement on behalf of Macedonia. 
"The most important issue for us is to have a stable energy system. This represents pragmatism for the benefit of the citizens of Macedonia," he said. 
