31/08/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 31/08/05
Macedonia is on the right track for membership in NATO, the spokesman for Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said in an interview published Wednesday (31 August). Speaking to the local daily Makedonija Denes, James Appathurai said NATO appreciates the serious efforts Skopje has made to achieve peace and stability and to implement the reforms outlined in the Ohrid Accords. 
"The progress towards peace and stability often needs compromises, imposes hard decisions, demands turning to the future and not to the past. That is something that NATO supports. Our message to Macedonia is to continue with the good work, progress has been made, and the Alliance welcomes that progress," Appathurai said. 
Earlier this month, Macedonia also received encouragement from US President George W. Bush, who described the country as a "an inspiration for the region". 
"During the past period, Macedonia was an inspiration for the region, promoting a great advantage and peace on her integrative way towards Europe. The Macedonian efforts to promote and to preserve the multiethnic society is a model for the other countries in the region and wider," Bush said in a letter to counterpart Branko Crvenkovski, marking Macedonia's National Day on 2 August. 
"We … will continue with our mutual support and partnership in promoting peace and democratisation in the world, including Iraq and Afghanistan. The United States of America counts on the strong friendship with Macedonia in the years to come," Bush wrote. 
For two years now, Macedonia has taken an active role in the global fight against terror, sending military personnel to participate in operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. At the same time, the country has implemented key defence reforms aimed at transforming its military into a smaller-size, modern and mobile force ready to deal with 21st-century threats such as terrorism and asymmetric warfare. 
The army has been reduced to 7,000 soldiers, from its pre-2001 level of more than 40,000. Around 4,000 of the current soldiers are professionals, while the rest are conscripts. Complete professionalisation is scheduled to take place by the end of 2006. 
Together with its efforts towards NATO membership, Macedonia has also made progress in its bid to join the EU, carrying out a series of reforms intended to harmonise its legislation with that of the Union. It applied for EU membership in early 2004 and is expecting the European Commission to issue an avis on whether the country is ready to be granted official candidate status. 
