02/01/2007
(Reuters, AFP, Independent, Sofia News Agency - 02/01/07; AP, AFP, FT, BBC, CNN, International Herald Tribune, VOA, RFE/RL, Sofia News Agency - 01/01/07; DPA, Deutsche Welle - 31/12/06)
Fireworks lit up the night skies in Bulgaria and Romania as the two Black Sea countries celebrated the New Year and their entry into the EU, 17 years after the fall of communism. 
The accession of the two nations, which began their journey to EU integration in 1995, makes a total of 27 Union members, and a population to 490 million people, with borders extending from the Atlantic Ocean to the Black Sea. 
"This is a day of historical justice, because Bulgarians have always been Europeans in spirit and identity," Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov said on Monday (January 1st) at an EU-flag-raising ceremony in Sofia. "Bulgaria will be a stable, predictable and consistent member of the EU," he told some 2,000 attendees, including officials and diplomats, as well as visiting European Parliament President Josep Borrell, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and the foreign ministers of Austria, Germany, Greece and Romania. 
In his traditional New Year's address to the nation in the last minutes of 2006, Parvanov described Bulgaria's EU entry as a "heavenly moment," which would "undoubtedly find its place among the most important dates in our national history". 
"A dream came true today -- a dream for generations of Bulgarians who wished to live together with the free and democratic peoples of Europe in peace and prosperity," Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev told thousands of revellers at Battenberg Square in Sofia. 
Borrell, Rehn and the other EU officials arrived in Sofia after participating in celebrations in Bucharest, where the bloc's blue-and-gold flag was hoisted at a ceremony attended by Romanian President Traian Basescu and Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu. 
"It was hard, but we arrived at the end of the road," Basescu said. "It is the road of our future," the president said, prompting cheers from the thousands gathered in Bucharest's University Square. "We arrived in Europe. Welcome to Europe." 
In a recorded congratulatory video message, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso welcomed the two newcomers into the EU family. 
"With Romania and Bulgaria, 30 million people are joining us, creating a Union of almost half a billion citizens," Barroso said. "The EU already is the biggest trade partner in the world, and is providing plenty of opportunities for its people and businesses … In welcoming two new members into the family, we know our culture and heritage will be richer." 
Rehn praised the two Black Sea countries for "impressive reforms in strengthening democracy, modernising their countries, making their justice systems more efficient and independent". 
Bulgaria and Romania's entry does not mean the end to reforms, as the two countries are joining the Union under the strictest conditions an acceding nation has ever faced. Both countries will be watched closely and will have to report to Brussels on a six-month basis to prove their progress in EU required reforms, including in the judiciary and in the fight against corruption. 
With a population of 7.7 million people, Bulgaria is entitled to receive 661m euros in the first year of its membership. Romania, whose population of about 22 million people makes it the seventh-largest EU nation, expects to receive as much as 1.7 billion euros over the same period. 
