26/08/2009
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 26/08/09
The Serbian movie "Ordinary People" directed by Vladimir Perisic won the prestigious Heart of Sarajevo Award at the 15th Sarajevo Film Festival (SFF). 
"For me this is a very important award because it comes from the very heart of the people of Sarajevo," said Perisic at the official award ceremony in Sarajevo's National Theatre. 
Perisic also received 25,000 euros, donated by the Council of Europe. 
"Ordinary People", a film about the dehumanising effects of war, also won the International Confederation of Art Cinemas award at SFF. 
While movies from Croatia, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) were well accepted by the Sarajevo audience, films from around the world also received high praise. 
"Actually, a Hungarian movie was better accepted [at the SFF] than in Hungary," said Elma Tataragic, film selector for the festival. 
Among the actors, Relja Popovic won the Heart of Sarajevo for best actor for his role in "Ordinary People". Greek actresses Aggeliki Papoulia and Mary Tsoni were this year's winners of the Heart of Sarajevo for best actress, while Croatian director Dalibor Matanic won the award for the best short film. The award for the best documentary went to Serbian actor and director Dragan Nikolic. 
This year's SFF also featured Hollywood personalities, such as the star of "The Wrestler", Mickey Rourke, and Gillian Anderson, who gained wide popularity for her role as Dana Scully in "The X-Files". Anderson also gave a lecture at the Third Sarajevo Talent Campus, an educational and networking programme for emerging film talents in the region. 
 A total of 232 films from 53 countries were screened during the festival. 
The presence of the films' authors and media representatives, alongside an audience of over 100,000, contributed to its success. Professionals and audiences agree the Sarajevo event has become the leading regional film festival. 
Festival Director Mirsad Purivatra, who founded the event during the BiH conflict in 1995, explained it "represents the main meeting place for all regional producers and authors". 
Purivatra expressed satisfaction that film professionals from around the world recognise the festival "as the pinnacle point for networking, for all wishing to learn more about the possibilities this region has to offer". 
