09/08/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 09/08/10 
Officially, Serbia has never advocated partitioning Kosovo. Such a development would violate the constitution, which describes Kosovo as an inalienable part of the state and prohibits any change to this status. 
The topic, nevertheless, keeps coming up, and a recent International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruling on the legality of Kosovo's February 2008 declaration of independence has triggered renewed debate. In comments to the media after the ruling, Serbian President Boris Tadic appeared to suggest that new options could be put on the table. 
"We are, of course, aware of the fact that maybe two million Albanians in Kosovo do not wish to accept the constitutional order of Serbia; but on the other hand, the world must be aware of the fact that the Serbs in Kosovo do not wish to accept the sovereign roof of the so-called state of Kosovo, and within that framework we should seek a solution that will ensure peace and development," he said. 
The ICJ's July 22nd ruling, which found that Pristina did not breach international law when it declared independence, has put Serbia in a difficult position, University of Belgrade political science professor Predrag Simic told SETimes. "However, I doubt the partition of Kosovo is a realistic option now," he said. 
Dusan Janjic, head of the Forum for Ethnic Relations, agreed, saying such a move would be "dangerous for the entire region". 
In the event of partition, Belgrade would have to acknowledge Kosovo's independence, Janjic added. "To divide Kosovo, one has to recognise it first and then sit at a table and partition it," he said. 
Aleksander Mitic, chief of the Kosovo Compromise project, believes Kosovo is already de facto divided territory, because Serbian laws are implemented in the north, the government in Pristina is unable to extend its authority there, and even members of the UN Security Council are in discord over the issue. 
"Belgrade has no real interest in aiming for some sort of 'formal' partition of Kosovo, because the parts of Kosovo populated by Serbs are already part of the Serbian system; through 'formal' partition, Belgrade would only recognise the independence of the rest of Kosovo," Mitic told SETimes. 
A warning not to negotiate the partition of Kosovo recently came from the opposition Democratic Party of Serbia, led by former prime minister Vojislav Kostunica. Party spokesman Petar Petkovic told SETimes that the partition idea is contrary to the constitution and could not be implemented without changes to the document. 
 "The partition of Kosovo would in fact mean that Belgrade is agreeing to the secession of Kosovo Albanians," Petkovic said. 
Kosovo authorities have also dismissed the idea. In an interview with the Pristina daily Kosova Sot, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said it would be "politically insane" to consider such options after the assessment of the ICJ, adding that Kosovo now has no reason to accept anything less than independence. 
The ruling has forever closed the possibility of talks on partition of Kosovo, its autonomy, special status or exchange of territories, Thaci said. 
