10/09/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 10/09/10
The UN General Assembly adopted a resolution sponsored by Serbia and the 27 EU members on Thursday (September 9th), calling for direct talks between Belgrade and Pristina. The move came after Serbia agreed to amend an earlier draft which had called for resuming negotiations on status. 
The new version calls instead for EU-backed dialogue aimed at promoting co-operation. The non-binding resolution was passed by acclamation at the 192-nation assembly. 
"The process of dialogue in itself would be a factor for peace, security and stability in the region, and that dialogue would be to promote co-operation, achieve progress on the path to the European Union and improve the lives of the people," it said. 
 The resolution recognises the EU's leading role in mediating Kosovo-Serbia talks and acknowledges the advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice (ICJ), which ruled in July that Kosovo's 2008 declaration of independence did not violate international law. 
 The document was read aloud to the Assembly by Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic, who described it as "fundamentally a status-neutral document". He stressed that Serbia still does not recognise Kosovo's declaration of independence. 
The General Assembly meeting was postponed for hours because the Serb delegation complained about the presence of the Kosovo delegation, which included President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni. After several hours of discussion, the Assembly President decided to continue, allowing the Kosovo representatives to remain. 
 Jeremic told Serb media later that the stalemate was resolved after the United States, Germany, Great Britain, Italy and France "invited the representatives of the Kosovo Albanians as guests". 
Despite the tensions evident at the Assembly session, the reaction in Pristina to the new resolution was generally positive. The government said it was "in full harmony with the reality created in Kosovo and the region". 
 "This draft resolution takes into account the advisory opinion of the ICJ, which has clearly ruled that the declaration of the independence of Kosovo is in full compliance with the international law. In addition, the new draft resolution rejects any possibility for negotiations on the political status of Kosovo," the government said. 
Kosovo leaders confirmed their readiness to co-operate with Serbia, on the basis of two independent states, with regard to issues of interstate bilateral interest and as part of the Euro-Atlantic perspective. But issues relating to sovereignty, territorial integrity and domestic constitutional order are off the table, they stressed. 
Speaking prior to the Assembly session, Thaci said that Kosovo and Serbia face common challenges and should engage in constructive co-operation on practical issues such as energy, telecommunications, waters, fighting organised crime, education, missing persons and the return of displaced people. 
US Deputy Permanent Representative to the UN Rosemary DiCarlo said Washington welcomes the EU's offer to assist the two sides in a constructive dialogue. 
 "Now is the time for the region to move forward and for Serbia and Kosovo to open a new phase in their relations, focused on their shared future within the EU," DiCarlo said. 
