10/05/2007
(B92 - 10/05/07; AP, Reuters, International Herald Tribune, RFE/RL, Xinhua, Serbianna - 09/05/07)
The UN Security Council must quickly prepare a draft resolution on Kosovo, a senior French official said on Wednesday (May 9th). A recent visit to the province by the 15-nation body showed that the issue of final status must be urgently resolved, he added. 
The Security Council "must assume its responsibility without any further delays," the Xinhua news agency quoted French Foreign Ministry spokesman Jean-Baptiste Mattei as saying. "This is why we are planning to work quite quickly with our partners towards a draft resolution very soon." 
His statement came a day after France's UN mission in New York hosted an informal meeting of the Security Council to discuss rival proposals for a draft resolution on Kosovo -- one prepared by Russia and the other by the United States and European countries. 
Both would reaffirm the Council's commitment to "a multiethnic and democratic Kosovo which must reinforce regional stability," and oppose any form of violence, the AP reported. 
Under the US-European proposal, the Security Council would endorse former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari's call for EU-supervised independence. UNMIK would wind up its activities 120 days after the adoption of the resolution, which would come under Chapter 7 of the UN Charter, dealing with threats to peace and security. 
The draft also calls on Kosovo to continue its efforts in implementing a set of internationally endorsed standards in eight areas, including rule of law, democratic institutions, protection of human and minority rights, economic development, freedom of movement and property rights. 
According to the AP, it also recognises "the non-consensual breakup of Yugoslavia, the violence and repression of the 1990s and the period of UN administration that make Kosovo a special case". 
Russia's proposal, by contrast, makes no mention of independence. Rather, it says the time is not yet ripe for a decision on status, and demands further talks "primarily focused on protection of minority rights". 
Voicing his country's strong backing for Ahtisaari's plan, US Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns said on Wednesday "there is now majority support in the Security Council for that plan, in fact very strong support". He also expressed hope that a resolution on final status will be put to a vote before the end of this month. 
However, Burns also suggested that his country and its European allies are prepared include some of Russia's suggestions in the final document. One such proposal is the appointment of an envoy tasked with encouraging Kosovo Serbs not to leave the province and calling on Serb refugees to return to their Kosovo homes. 
"That was a very attractive idea put forward by the Russians. We support it," Burns said. "We want to work with Russia … It's clear to us that a prolonged delay in seeing the way forward towards independence for Kosovo is more likely to produce instability and violence than a clear decision this spring." 
To pass, the Security Council resolution must be supported by a total of nine members and must not be vetoed by any of the five permanent members. Russia indicated earlier that it would block a decision unless both Pristina and Belgrade accept it. China's position is unclear. 
Quoting an unnamed senior British official, the Financial Times reported earlier this week that 11 or 12 of the Security Council nations support Ahtisaari's plan. 
