24/09/2012
By Lily Lynch for the Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 24/09/12
Islamic anger about an independent film offensive to the Prophet Mohammed drew peaceful protests in Athens, Turkey and Serbia over the weekend, but demonstrations avoided the violence that has marred some protests in other nations. 
As many as 500 people protested peacefully in Istanbul on Sunday (September 23rd), chanting slogans while marching at Taksim Square, according to media reports. 
In Athens, riot police were forced to use tear gas and pepper spray against hundreds of protesters who attempted to march to the US Embassy during a demonstration at a central square, according to The Associated Press. Six people were detained, but there were no injuries. 
Serbian protesters marched Friday in the Muslim-majority region of Sandzak in the regional capital of Novi Pazar on Friday (September 21st), in a gathering organised by a local football club. Several thousand protestors marched from a main square, waving banners with messages such as "The Prophet is in my heart." Other participants carried Turkish and Bosnian flags. 
The protests were sparked by the trailer of an independent film, "Innocence of Muslims," on the Internet. The US government had no connection with the video, which was produced privately by a real estate developer. 
At least 49 people have been killed worldwide, including US Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens, who was killed along with three others in an attack on the US consulate in Benghazi on September 11th. The US has called the deaths the result of a terrorist attack. 
Sandzak mufti Muamer Zukorlic said the Islamic community supported the protests, but do not support violence. "The Islamic community in Serbia did not take part in organising the protest but it has its full support, as Muslims have the right to protest against such insults," Zukorlic told B92. 
Meanwhile, some analysts said that clerical support for the protests was politically motivated. 
"The protests in Novi Pazar are more a part of the domestic political scene. This was an opportunity for some political options to demonstrate that Sanjak Muslims are part of some bigger pan-Islamic movement. Of course, Muslims in Serbia are part of the so-called Balkan or European Islam, which is much more secular and close to western culture and values. Therefore, the protests in Novi Pazar were peaceful and with a clear domestic political agenda," Dragan Popovic, executive director of Policy Centre, told SETimes. 
While some residents of Sandzak said they were angered by the film, they condemned any response which included violence. "You can't fix one injustice with another," Emina Bisevac, a saleswoman, told SETimes. 
Meanwhile, some young people in the region said that Friday's protest had served as a temporary distraction from the region's problems. 
"This is one of the topics that move people away from real existential problems. The kind of event that was held in Novi Pazar on Friday will not have a bigger influence in other towns of southwestern Serbia," Admir Veljovic, a youth worker from the town of Prijepolje, told SETimes. 
