02/05/2012
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 02/05/12
Macedonian police arrested 20 people Monday (May 1st) on charges of involvement in the killings of five people near Skopje last month -- a mass slaying that ignited protests in the capital and outrage throughout the region. 
The victims included four men ages 18 to 20 and a 45-year-old man, who police said was a witness who was killed apparently while trying to flee. The men were slain April 12th at Zhelezarsko Lake near Skopje. 
Police said those arrested include radical Islamists who fought against NATO forces in Afghanistan and Pakistan. 
"The main motive most likely is to create a sense of fear among the public. At no time do we exclude the possibility for radical activities by individuals and groups, because Macedonia is among those countries that are a potential target for radical Islamists," Gordana Jankulovska, minister of internal affairs, told SETimes. 
More than 800 ministry personnel participated in the operation, which was conducted in Arachinovo, Chair, Shuto orizari and Chento -- Skopje neighbourhoods with predominantly Albanian populations. Police searched 26 structures, removing weapons and literature indicating the suspects' ideology. 
A video of the officers searching the buildings shows photos of suspects and others with National/Kosovo Liberation Army (UCK) paraphanelia and an Albanian flag in the background. 
Macedonian security officials said they are now investigating whether a larger terrorist group is behind the massacre. 
"We are also acting preventively, as well as repressively, because nothing should change our way of life," Jankulovska said. 
Former Internal Affairs Minister and MP Pavle Trajanov told SETimes that fears that the massacre was a terrorist act aiming to destabilise the region have proved true. 
"The evil deed is within the context of the developments in Kosovo and the unsolved problems there. The goal of this extremist group was to cause an inter-ethnic clash in Macedonia to focus away attention from Kosovo's north where the heart of the problem actually is," Trajanov said. 
"Macedonia is selected as a base of operations because, unlike Kosovo, it is not fully covered security-wise by the Western powers," Petar Shkrbina, a retired military officer and military-security analyst, told SETimes. 
While not discounting a regional political dimension of the massacre, Shkrbina explained it is clear that the participants are trained "sleepers," with ties to the wider Wahhabi movement in the Balkans. 
"It is more important now to find out which centre the execution order came from. Macedonia is actively fighting terrorism internationally, and that is why it is a target of such structures," Shkrbina said. 
FON University Professor Mersel Biljali, however, is cautious about the information received by the state security services. He told SETimes the event should not be given a religious dimension. 
"The accent is placed on Islamic fundamentalism for political purposes. Everything should be checked carefully to avoid a situation where these people are [blamed] to cover the true culprits," Biljali said. 
Ivan Babanovski, a former security studies professor, said the police operation is the beginning of actions to address the larger security issues facing Macedonia, as well as the region. 
"They will finally need to deal with the radical Islamists of UNIKOM in Struga, a group directly organised and financed by al-Qaeda since 1994. Also symptomatic is the presence in Kumanovo of Serbia Islamic leader, Mufti Muamer Zukorlic's collaborators and followers," Babanovski told SETimes. 
"International co-ordination is needed to control all the extremisms in the Balkans. With US and EU assistance, Macedonia can more actively contribute towards achieving that goal," he added. 
