02/12/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 02/12/04
After years of foot-dragging, Republika Srpska last month officially acknowledged the Srebrenica massacre, publishing a formal apology to victims' families on the government Web site. However, authorities in the Bosnian Serb-run entity have failed to convince the international community of their readiness to co-operate with the UN war crimes tribunal. 
"The government of the RS commiserates with the pain of the relatives of [the victims] of Srebrenica, and truly regrets and apologise for the tragedy they experienced," the apology read. It was part of the official response to a report by the entity government's Srebrenica Commission. 
"The report doubtlessly demonstrates that, in the area of Srebrenica in July 1995, crimes of huge extent were committed by means of rude violation of the international humanitarian law. The government of the RS is committed to, and it assumes decisive measures to, bring to the justice all persons who committed war crimes," authorities said. 
The Srebrenica Commission was established when the Human Rights Chamber for BiH accepted 49 lawsuit applications filed by Srebrenica victims' families against the RS government for its failure to provide and disclose information about missing family members. In its decision on 7 March 2003, the Chamber ordered RS to provide the necessary response. 
The final report came after several extensions of deadlines, pressure from the international Office of the High Representative (OHR) and re-establishment of the commission -- adding a Bosniak and international expert. 
Victims' families expressed moderate satisfaction with the RS government's statement, but said it had come grudgingly and fell well short of fulfilling the entity's obligations. "We do not need an apology that came based on the pressure of the international community. The report did not mention genocide. We need to see those responsible for the crime to be brought to justice," said Nura Begovic from the Organisation of Srebrenica Women. 
While welcoming the report, the OHR and the heads of EU missions in BiH also called on RS authorities to arrest war crimes indictees, as well as to take further steps to locate mass graves and identify victims. 
In her report to the UN Security Council last month, chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte criticised RS authorities for their failure to apprehend a single indictee in the nine years since the 1992-1995 conflict ended. According to del Ponte, war crimes fugitives hiding in RS continue to enjoy the protection of powerful networks. 
On Tuesday (30 November) a Sarajevo newspaper published evidence suggesting that top war crimes indictee Ratko Mladic -- who led the forces that over-ran Srebrenica, and is believed to have ordered the massacre -- remained on Bosnian Serb Army rolls until 2002, and may even have drawn pay. 
