08/06/2011
(The Washington Post, Deutsche Welle, DPA, Bloomberg, Los Angeles Times, FT, VOA, Reuters, The Sofia Echo, Xinhua - 08/06/11; RFE/RL, AFP, The White House - 07/06/11)
Germany will play a leading role in mapping out a way forward for Greece, US President Barack Obama said on Tuesday (June 7th), while pledging his country's support for efforts to prevent the Balkan nation's debt crisis from triggering the first default in the eurozone. 
 "Germany is going to be a key leader in that process. And the politics of it are tough," Obama said in a joint news conference with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Washington. 
While voicing confidence that Berlin and other key EU players will be able to help Greece return to the path of economic growth and gain better control over its mounting debt, the US president cautioned that this would require both time and patience. 
The United States has assured Germany and the other countries involved of its backing for actions towards that end, as it is also in its own interest to be "supportive", because "America's economic growth depends on a sensible resolution" to the current crisis. 
 "It would be disastrous for us to see an uncontrolled spiral and default in Europe, because that could trigger a whole range of other events," Obama warned. 
Europeans would be the ones to ultimately decide what measures need to be taken to prop up Greece, but they would have to involve private investment, he added. What Athens should do is implement structural reforms to improve its competitiveness, as well as ensure that its economic system becomes more transparent, he noted. 
Merkel, who began her official visit to the United States on Tuesday morning, said Europe is "very well aware" of its responsibility as a key player in the global economy, so -- just as the United States is -- it is taking steps to generate growth and boost employment. 
"Through the global financial and economic crisis, we've seen how interdependent we are," the German chancellor said. "The stability of the eurozone is therefore an important factor of stability for the whole of the global economy. So we do see clearly our European responsibility and we're shouldering that responsibility together with the IMF." 
The events in recent months have shown how problems in one of the 17 countries in the eurozone can affect the stability of their shared currency, the euro. The purpose of the assistance within the bloc is to deal with such negative influences, Merkel noted. 
"There's actually a ban on bailouts in the treaties underpinning the (EU) stability and growth pact. But if a country is in danger and thereby endangers the euro as a whole, it is in each and every country's vested interest to see to it that this common currency area is not endangered," she said. "And we will act in such a way, however, that sustainability is guaranteed." 
 During their talks, the two leaders covered a range of other pressing global issues, including NATO's operations in Libya and Afghanistan, Iran's nuclear programme and the historical changes in the Middle East and North Africa. 
Obama said he and Merkel agreed that Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi must "step down for the sake of his own people". 
The chancellor, who refused to contribute German troops to NATO's military campaign in Libya, said Germany "will be showing that it is responsible and committed to the Libyan cause" in the post-conflict period, when there will be many problems to address. 
 "Germany supports the NATO operation simply by being present in the stance there, and also by stepping up our commitment in Afghanistan," Merkel noted. "It is our joint will that this NATO mission is successful." 
 Echoing her words concerning Germany's future role in Libya, Obama said his expectation would be "that there will be full and robust German support" for all the work that will be required after Gaddafi is gone. 
