30/04/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 30/04/08
Top Serbian and EU representatives signed the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), the first step by Western Balkan countries towards full integration with the EU, in Luxembourg on Tuesday (April 29th). Ratification will occur only after the EU Council of Ministers has found Serbia to be fully co-operating with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
The tribunal wants Serbia to extradite four more indictees, including Bosnian Serb wartime commander Ratko Mladic and Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan Karadzic. 
Signing the pact were Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and the EU's 27 foreign ministers. Serbian President Boris Tadic and EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana attended the ceremony. 
 Rehn said the signing sent a clear signal to all Serbs that they had a future in Europe. He called the SAA signing a turning point in relations between Serbia and the EU. 
Solana said that the EU would be incomplete without the Western Balkan countries. "This [the EU] is your home; this is where you belong," he said. 
Tadic voiced hope that Serbia would become an EU membership candidate by the end of the year, which would give the country access to more funds from the Union budget. He also shrugged off accusations that signing the SAA meant recognising the independence of Kosovo. 
"Serbia has both the right and obligation to defend its own integrity and identity, and there I am primarily talking about Kosovo and Metohija. And Serbia at the same time has every right to demand its European future," Tadic said. He promised that the state would fulfill all obligations to the ICTY, despite significant disappointment over the release of former Kosovo Liberation Army Commander Ramush Haradinaj, who was acquitted earlier this month of charges of crimes against Serbs and ethnic Albanian collaborators. 
However, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Serbian Radical Party officials denounced the signing, claiming that it meant acceptance of Kosovo's independence. Kostunica described it as "an unconstitutional and anti-state act", which does not obligate Serbia. 
"We will never let anyone certify Kosovo's independence on behalf of Serbia, and that is why Tadic's signature is absolutely worthless," Kostunica said. 
Rehn, however, dismissed any links between the SAA and the status of Kosovo. He noted that the agreement states that Kosovo is under UN administration, which makes it "neutral" concerning the issue of Kosovo's status. However, Kosovo so far has been recognised by as many as 18 EU members. 
