21/11/2011
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 21/11/11
Over 4,000 students from across Montenegro took to the streets last Thursday (November 18th) in Podgorica demanding that education officials improve conditions for study. 
Students walked from the Podgorica University campus to parliament carrying slogans "I do not want to party, I want a job" and "Do not tell me to shut up". 
They are demanding lower tuition fees, improved conditions in student dormitories, quality instruction as required by the Bologna Process, free public transportation, as well as more government efforts to boost employment after graduation. 
The Bologna Process -- under which 20,000 students receive instruction in Montenegro -- was introduced in 2003. It is a system that seeks to make academic standards comparable and compatible throughout Europe. 
Philosophy student Ognjen Jovovic, one of the protest leaders, told SETimes that the application of the Process has been a complete fiasco. 
"At the Faculty of Philosophy in Niksic, attendance is 53%, and we know that by Bologna's rules, a student can be absent only three times to be able to pass. The practice required by Bologna's rules is science fiction here," he told SETimes. 
Jovovic added that the percent of GDP the government allocates for science is negligible, and emphasises that students seek financial autonomy and a fixed budget for all universities. 
The average annual tuition fee is 500 euros but some faculties -- such as the architecture or art school -- charge students 1,000 euros. The average monthly salary in Montenegro is about 470 euros. 
Podgorica electrical engineering student Danilo Vukcevic, 23, told SETimes that the quality of teaching is poor and the standards established by the Bologna Process have failed in Montenegro. 
"Law faculty lectures are attended by several hundred students. According to ˈBolognaˈ, a professor can be attributed largely to teach 30 students. How do you expect to attract the attention of 300 students?" he asked. 
Vukcevic explained that the admissions policy has not changed for years and admissions officers do not factor in the students' job prospects. 
"The labour market fundamentally changed in the last 20 years. Who needs 300 diplomacy students? Where will they get a job? I guess not all become ambassadors," Vukcevic said. 
Authorities say in their defence that they are constantly working to upgrade the conditions for study. Education Ministry spokesperson Vesna Gajevic told SETimes past experience has shown dialogue is best for finding quality solutions. 
"Representatives of the ministry will talk to Montenegro Railways management about offering discounts for student transportation of 50%. The ministry will continue the collaboration with student representatives to find the best solution for their requirements," she said. 
Gajevic added that students have always been and will be included in all panels and working groups dealing with creating high education policy. 
Retired Electrical Engineering Faculty professor Sletozar Jovicevic agrees that the conditions and quality of education -- and employment prospects -- are poor. 
Jovicevic told SETimes that many are moving away from the Bologna Process because authorities use it to justify bad or unpopular practices. 
"When we introduced ˈBolognaˈ, we should have established a strong monitoring of the entire process from the beginning and systematically corrected bad things. Today, when professors are teaching 300 or 400 students [in a class], it is physically impossible to withstand. The capacity to implement Bologna [requirements] is insufficient," he added. 
Professor Jovicevic said the student demands are a "good start" but should be tougher. 
There is no indication at present whether the authorities will accept the student demands. 
"We will not stop. If demands are not accepted, we will organise protests again and fight for what is ours," student leader Jovovic said. 
