11/04/2013
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 11/04/13 
A mass shooting that killed 13 people and injured another in the Serbian village of Velika Ivanca village could have been triggered by post-traumatic stress disorder from being a soldier in the armed conflicts in the region, psychiatrists said. 
Ljubisa Bogdanovic, 60, shot and killed his son and mother and severely injured his wife on Tuesday (April 9th) morning. 
Bogdanovic then broke into the homes of nearby relatives and shot and killed 11 people as they slept. Among the victims is a 2-year-old boy. 
"He was a quiet, family man, they were a wealthy family and had no financial problems," Milovan Kostadinovic, a neighbour of the Bogdanovic family, told SETimes. 
While Bogdanovic broke into nearby houses and killed residents, his injured wife Javorka Bogdanovic called the police. 
Bogdanovic's brother said he had changed after serving in the army during a Serb-led offensive against the eastern Croatian town of Vukovar in 1992, the worst bloodshed during Croatia's 1991-1995 war for independence. 
"The war had burdened him. He used to tell me: 'God forbid you live through what I went through' ... Something must have clicked in his head for him to do this," the suspect's older brother Radmilo told The Associated Press. 
Psychiatrist Milan Milic told SETimes that post-traumatic stress disorder could be the cause of the crime. In Serbia, there are between 400,000 and 700,000 soldiers from the 1990s conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, and one in 10 citizens of Serbia was in a war zone. 
"Also, it could be at stake and severe depression or psychosis, as indicated by the murder of a child," Milic said. 
Bogdanovic recently lost his job, which could affect the escalation of depressive symptoms and lead to extreme behaviour disorders. 
Vladimir Beara, of the Centre for War Trauma in Novi Sad, told SETimes that participants in the 1990s conflicts from Serbia have been largest left to cope with their experiences without support. "Even in countries that [aided] the veterans, like in Croatia, 2,000 veterans have committed suicide," Beara said. 
Dag Kolarević, professor at the Criminal Police Academy in Belgrade, said he doubted the killings stemmed from revenge because Bogdanovic accurately shot the victims in the head. 
"It's not like the act of a mentally incompetent person," Kolarević told SETimes. 
When Bogdanovic saw a police patrol, he fled to his house and shot himself. He was transferred to the Emergency Centre in Belgrade. 
Many village residents praised the police's quick response, and said they could have been the next victims. 
"If the police did not arrive in a few minutes, we'd also be dead because he walked toward our house," Stanica Kostadinović, a neighbour, told SETimes. 
Radoslav Zaric, a resident of the village of Velika Ivanča, said he heard the shots, but he stayed in his house. 
"He had to pass through here, and he saw me out there he probably would have shot at me," Zaric told SETimes. 
"For now we do not know the motive for the crime, but we know that Bogdanovic has no criminal record, was not treated for a mental illness, he was not an alcoholic or violent person," Serbian Police Director Milorad Veljovic told the media. 
The Serbian government held an extraordinary session on Tuesday and declared a day of mourning for Wednesday. 
Serbia has a low murder rate, according to the World Health Organisation. In 2010, there were 1.2 intentional homicides per 100,000 inhabitants. 
What can governments do to help those suffering from post-tramatic stress disorder? Tell us your thoughts in a comment. 
