02/05/2005
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 05/05/02
The presidential and legislative elections of November 2004 resulted in a major political shift in Romania. The new government introduced a radical fiscal reform which relies on a flat tax of 16 per cent on incomes and profits. The reform is best viewed within the wider context of fiscal competition across Europe -- wealthy and less wealthy countries alike are attempting to lure more inward investment at a time when competitiveness challenges are multiplying. Hungary and Poland have led the way in recent years, with the latter country -- keeping the experience of Slovakia in mind -- contemplating a flat tax. Older EU members have not been insensitive to these measures. Austria has already lowered corporate taxes, and German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder recently announced plans to do so. 
Although the rationale for lower taxes is transparent, the timing of the Romanian government's move has raised questions. The economy has been growing rapidly in recent years, at an average rate of 6 per cent of GDP over the last four years, and more than 8 per cent in 2004. At the same time, external deficits have been on a steady and rapid rise. This context is what lies behind the difficult dialogue Bucharest has been conducting with IMF experts in recent months. The Fund is concerned that budget revenues could be adversely affected by the flat tax in an economy that they view as "overheating". 
However, the Romanian flat tax has to be judged in the wider context of Romania's planned entry into the EU in 2007. The country signed its accession treaty on 25 April, but its social and economic performance must bolster its reform efforts in order to avoid having its entry delayed by one year, as provided for by the so-called "safeguard" clause. In the interim, Romania will continue to come under pressure to make its economy more market-oriented. 
In fact, the overall picture has been improving substantially. Inflation is at a one digit level for the first time in 15 years, the banking system is on a solid footing, the reserves of the National Bank cover more then six months of imports, and exports have been rising vigorously. But fragile areas in the economy remain, and specific changes, such as full liberalisation of the capital account, are demanded by the acquis communautaire. This, along with tax reform and a number of other institutional shocks -- freer floating of the lei (ROL), administered price and tariff rises, the introduction of the hard ROL, the shifting to direct inflation targeting, a new labour code, and the requirements of the EU competition policy -- will test the economy's capacity to adjust smoothly. 
The new measures are likely to reveal significant rigidities, which will necessitate adjustments. The National Bank, by maintaining a range of 3 per cent around the annual inflation target of 7 per cent, speaks implicitly about the possibility of an inflation slippage, which could occur at an ill-suited time, in view of the introduction of a monetary policy regime that focuses clearly on inflation. 
Data regarding the commercial deficit over the first two months of the year point to the continued growth trend: it is approximately 80 per cent higher compared to the same period in 2004. The current account deficit has also continued to grow at a fast pace, with the non-governmental credit setting the pace. On 1 April, a wave of price and tariff rises began, impacting the dynamics of inflation. The progress of disinflation depends not only on the reverberations of these rises throughout the economy, but also on their impact on inflationary expectations. 
 The macroeconomic situation sketched above shows why the discussion regarding possible policy slippages is not a mere intellectual exercise. The growth of the economy, the expansion of the non-governmental credit and the appreciation of the ROL lead to larger external deficits. The appreciation of the ROL is helpful for disinflation, but to what extent remains to be seen -- hence the concern regarding the "overheating" of the economy. Should slippages occur this year, however, they should not be dramatised. It is not the budget deficit which is to blame for the rise of the current account deficit; the main driving engine, by far, is private sector borrowing, which accounts for about 85 per cent of the figure. Squeezing the public budget for the sake of limiting external deficits will be of little help. 
As the time horizon is extended, the situation becomes more complex. Romania's prolonged dialogue with IMF experts does not centre on this year's numbers, but on the broader perspective, and specifically on the emergence of pressures -- unrelated to tax reform -- on the public budget. EU accession involves substantial expenditures, including the contribution to the community budget (about 1.3 per cent of GDP) and the co-financing of structural funds (over 1 per cent of GDP). Together with social security reform and the need to supplement the funds allotted for education and health, budget expenditures will grow by at least 3 per cent to 4 per cent annually. Without a better collection of budget revenues, and assuming other conditions remain unchanged, the deficit of the consolidated public budget would reach 4 per cent to 5 per cent of GDP in a few years' time. 
The ever-decreasing budget deficits of the last few years have been hiding an important structural problem, arising from two factors. One is the impossibility of repressing expenditures if Romania is to provide a volume of public goods appropriate for an EU member country. The second is that EU accession brings with it requirements for competitiveness and modernisation. 
 As a new member, Romania will be joining several neighbours which have accumulated high budget deficits due to accession costs. But the situation in the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland differs significantly from that of Romania. In those countries, budget revenues are larger by a few GDP percentage points, making it easier to enact painful adjustments on the expenditure side of the budget in case these cuts are needed. Moreover, in these countries the "twin deficits" logic is operative, with external deficits co-existing with considerable budget deficits -- thus, a major decrease of the budget deficit would likely lead to an appropriate fall of the current account deficit, were a balance of payments adjustment badly needed. 
 In Romania, the falling budget deficits of the last few years have cohabitated with swiftly growing current account deficits. Should the budget deficit grow significantly in the years to come, without a reduction in the private sector's appetite for consumption and borrowing, the current account deficit could easily reach over 10 per cent of GDP. Such a level would be worrisome to the extent to which it would involve funding from short term loans and inflows of speculative capital. A massive depreciation of the ROL could then be expected, which in turn would reignite inflation and possibly lead to readjustment of the public budget. 
Should EU accession bring about a dramatic improvement in Romania’s economic and social performance, the concerns described above will be largely alleviated. More modest improvements could, at the very least, help the country deal with future budgetary issues. It would be unrealistic to expect these issues to disappear miraculously. Romania cannot afford to ignore them during its dialogue with the IMF 
