14/07/2010
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Tuzla -- 14/07/10
In the wake of last month's severe flooding in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the United States and Turkey are offering aid for the thousands who remain displaced. 
 "We received great help from USAID, which was the first to offer assistance, in the amount of 40,000 euros," said Red Cross Secretary Namik Hodzic. 
 On July 7th, Turkey's Foreign Ministry and General Staff, together with the Red Crescent organisation, released a joint statement saying that ten tonnes of aid had been sent to Sarajevo, including beds and food packs. 
BiH's Civil Defence and the Red Cross are monitoring the situation and assisting residents. According to Hodzic, food packages, sleeping bags, blankets and hygiene kits bought with the money were immediately distributed to those in need. 
Staff at the US Embassy in Sarajevo told SETimes that Ambassador Charles English wants to ensure that help for displaced people is available as soon as possible. 
 The flooding, deemed the worst the country has seen, occured in late June. The Federation of BiH's (FBiH) Tuzla canton was hit the hardest. 
"A large number of houses are flooded and we had to evacuate the population to collective centres or [direct them] to their relatives' houses [elsewhere]," Tuzla Canton Civil Defence Director Zdenko Tadic told SETimes. 
 He said mudslides also affected the infrastructure, complicating the situation on the ground. "Roads were damaged and some parts of the water-supply network were completely destroyed," he explained. 
In Maglaj, 41 families were forced to evacuate their homes after a landslide. The FBiH government allocated 2,500 euros per family for lodging. 
Maglaj municipality officials want to build a residential facility to accommodate those whose homes are no longer habitable. 
Officials estimate thousands of hectares of farm land were affected by the floods. Because nearly 60% of the land is destroyed, consumers are bracing for higher prices on the smaller amount of crops this autumn. 
 According to unoffical assessments, property damage in Tuzla will top 15m euros. After the deadline for a final cost assessment passes, the damaged regions can ask for state assistance. 
However, there will not be enough money to remedy all damage, and farmers whose crops are almost completely ruined are particularly anxious. 
"I make my living from agriculture and that is all I have, but after these rains I am left with nothing," vegetable producer Muhamed Hasic of Zivinci told SETimes. 
Hasic said his crops are devastated and his house is flooded. "The cantonal authorities came to assess the damage and promised assistance. I am not quite an optimist when it comes to assistance, because a farmer can never get a return from the state on money he invested, but I hope," he said. 
