01/08/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 01/08/11
Isik Kosaner, chief of the General Staff, together with the heads of the army, navy and air force stepped down on Friday (July 29th), sending shockwaves through Ankara. The resignations were announced just days before a crucial high-level meeting of the Supreme Military Council (YAS), which runs August 1st to 4th to decide promotions and resignations. 
Reports indicate the top military brass asked for early retirement in protest over the current detention of over 250 officers on charges of conspiring against the government. The prime minister and president have traditionally endorsed the military's recommendations for promotion without interference, but tensions were raised when the government and military clashed over the promotion of detained officers. 
In a farewell message to "brothers in arms", General Kosaner said it was impossible to continue his job as he could not defend detained solders due to a flawed judicial process. 
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan quickly announced commander of the Gendarmerie, General Necdet Ozel, as the new chief of the general staff. Traditionally, the chief of the general staff has always been the ground forces commander. 
According to analysts, the resignations indicate the rising supremacy of the civilian administration over the military in a country that has witnessed three military coups and substantial indirect intervention by the military into politics. 
Salih Kapusuz, deputy leader of Erdogan's AKP, says everything has run according to procedure, while highlighting the resignations have not affected the order and functioning of the army. 
"Turkey is implementing the procedures of democratisation and legalisation," he told SETimes, calling the resignation "nothing more than an act of early retirement". 
"He [Kosaner] admitted the real reasons [of the resignation]," Kapusuz says, adding that when it comes to the independent court investigation "there is nothing to do with a third side, even the government." 
However, the investigation into the alleged coup plots, going into its fourth year, has been criticised by many for its arbitrariness, politicisation, and the detention of suspects on often flimsy grounds. 
Akif Hamzacebi, CHP parliamentary group deputy chairman, says "it is not about the court investigations; the issue itself is under the government's control." 
"They [the government] want to redesign the military along their own lines", he told SETimes. 
Oktay Vural, MHP deputy chairman and parliamentary group chairman, says the investigations have been used to blacken the image of the army which is often cited as the most respected institution in the country. 
"There is a worry that investigations of the conspiracy against the government are targeted at discrediting and silencing the army," he told SETimes. 
Meanwhile, analyst Halil Karaveli from the Central Asia-Caucasus Institute & Silk Road Studies Programme, emphasises that instead of staging a coup or sending veiled threats, the generals stepped down. 
"That says it all," he told SETimes. "General Necdet Ozel, the incoming chief of the General staff, is a new type of general, with a 'civilian' mind, respectful of the government. Thus, his elevation represents a chance to reset the relationship between the civilian authorities and the military." 
"In the short run, I expect that the government will take steps that strengthen the position of General Ozel within the military, by displaying some leniency toward the generals," he adds. 
Kemal Kaya, Turkey defence analyst and senior fellow at the Institute for Security and Development Policy, says recent developments show there is a power struggle between the secular establishment and moderate Islamists. 
"With the assignment of Necdet Ozel as head of general, the crisis seems to be settled. However, we should expect new peaks in crises in coming days between the civil authority and military circles," he told SETimes. 
