11/03/2005
(Financial Times, International Herald Tribune - 10/03/05)
Meeting in Brussels on Thursday (10 March), EU ambassadors failed to agree on whether the European Commission should launch accession talks with Croatia on 17 March as scheduled. According to media reports, the majority of EU member states, led by Britain, Germany, the Netherlands and Sweden, opposed the opening of negotiations because of Zagreb's failure to arrest and extradite fugitive indictee Ante Gotovina. They warned that allowing the process to proceed before Croatia has fulfilled its obligations to the UN war crimes tribunal would harm the integrity of both the UN court and the EU. 
A smaller group of countries, including Hungary, Austria, Slovakia and Slovenia, were said to favour starting the talks as planned. All members must give their approval before the accession talks can begin. 
"Croatia seems to be in denial. Someone appears to have told Croatia we are bluffing. We are not. There is not unanimity in the council, and until there is unanimity negotiations can't open," a British spokesman said in reference to recent statements by Prime Minister Ivo Sanader and other Croatian officials, who assured the public that negotiations would begin despite Gotovina's absence from The Hague. 
Luxembourg, which holds the rotating EU presidency, is now expected to try to reconcile both camps during the next several days, and will likely present a new proposal to Croatia on 14 March. A final decision on starting the talks will be made by EU foreign ministers on 16 March -- one day before the talks are supposed to get under way. 
Gotovina, one of the tribunal's most-wanted indictees, has been on the run for three years. Croatian authorities continue to insist they are doing everything they can to catch him -- a claim chief UN prosecutor Carla del Ponte refutes. 
"Despite all public and private assurances from Zagreb, Ante Gotovina remains within reach of the Croatian authorities, and, until such time as he is brought to The Hague, it cannot be said that Croatia is co-operating fully with the international tribunal," she wrote in a letter to EU foreign ministers earlier this week. 
Del Ponte acknowledged that the Croatian authorities had taken some steps against Gotovina, including freezing his financial assets. However, she added, "These steps come late, are of marginal value and can hardly change the issues." 
The future of Croatia's accession bid depends neither on del Ponte nor the EU, said Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn. "I can only say that the key lies with the Croatian government in Zagreb," he said. 
