04/05/2010
(AFP, AKI, RFE/RL, B92, Radio Srbija - 03/05/10; Fena - 29/04/10)
Around 150 Bosnian Serbs arrived in Sarajevo from Republika Srpska (RS) on Monday (May 3rd) to pay tribute to the victims of an incident in the city at the start of the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
 It was the first time that relatives of the Yugoslav National Army (JNA) soldiers killed in the former Dobrovoljacka Street on that day 18 years earlier were able to commemorate their deaths at the site of the incident. 
Viewing the Bosnian Serbs' request as a "provocation" and an attempt to revise history, the Sarajevo city council asked the BiH interior ministry last week to ban the event, but the request was turned down. 
Amid fears of a potential outburst of violence, authorities beefed up security measures ahead of the ceremony. Police cordons went up in the area to prevent clashes between participants in the gathering and a parallel one further down the street, organised by veterans of the wartime Bosniak "Green Berets" paramilitary group to pay respects to the "defenders of Sarajevo". 
No incidents were reported from either event. 
The Bosnian Serbs laid white roses and lit candles where a JNA convoy was attacked while pulling out of Sarajevo on May 3rd 1992. 
"They killed our children and no one was held responsible," news agencies quoted Bogdana Tomovic, whose 18-year-old son was killed in the incident, as saying. "We want justice for the crime against soldiers who were peacefully withdrawing from Sarajevo." 
Serbs claim the attack on the convoy violated a prior agreement on the peaceful evacuation of their forces. In February last year, the Serbian interior ministry issued an arrest warrant for 19 people linked to the attack, including two members of the wartime Bosnian presidency, Stjepan Kljujic and Ejup Ganic. 
Announcing the move, it claimed that 42 Serb soldiers and officers were killed in the incident and another 73 were injured. 
The US State Department said in its Human Rights Report last year that the attack led to the deaths of at least 18 people, while different Bosniak sources maintain that the number of victims ranged between six and nine. 
In April 1992, Bosnian Serb forces, backed by JNA troops and artillery, begun a 43-month siege of Sarajevo, in which an estimated 10,000 people died. 
At the time of the Dobrovoljacka Street incident, the people of Sarajevo, "regardless of their ethnicity, were defending the town from attack by the Yugoslav army, one of the strongest European military forces", Muhamed Svrakic, of an association of Muslim war veterans, said on Monday. 
Acting on the Serbian arrest warrant, British authorities detained Ganic in London on March 1st. He was later released on bail set at 300,000 euros, but was not allowed to leave Britain pending a final court ruling on his possible extradition to Serbia. That ruling is expected on July 13th. 
