02/11/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 02/11/05
The 45th MESS festival concluded on Saturday (29 October) in Sarajevo, wrapping up 15 days of performances by theatre groups from 13 countries, staged at five different theatre halls in the Bosnian capital and at Zenica. Over the years, the festival has developed a reputation for building cultural bridges. 
"Angel of Death", created and staged by the world-renowned Belgian choreographer, visual artist and theatre director Jan Fabre, won the Golden Laurel Wreath, honoring the best overall performance. The work, a dramatic monologue accompanied by bass saxophone and video screen projections, is inspired by the American artist Andy Warhol and the dancer/choreographer William Forsythe. 
Fabre also received a Golden Laurel for Best Director, as did Hungary's Victor Bodo. Two awards for Best Overall Acting were given -- one to the cast of Bodo's production, "Rattledanddisappeared", and the other to the Latvian cast of "The Long Life," directed by Alvis Hermanis. 
The Rejhan Demirdzic Award for Best Actor/Actress went to the Bosnian actor Amar Selimovic, for his performance in Haris Pasovic's staging of "Hamlet". The Jurislav Korenic Award for Best Young Director at the MESS Festival 2005 went to Russia's Vasily Senin, for his direction of "Anna Karenina". Alongside the official awards, the MESS Festival also presented the Viewers' Choice Award, decided by audience votes. The prize went to "The Long Life". 
The MESS International Theatre Festival was established nearly a half century ago as the Festival of Chamber and Experimental Scenes. Since then, it has hosted all the most significant figures of theatre in the former Yugoslavia. The Festival succeeded in maintaining its continuity even amid the violence of the BiH conflict and the siege of Sarajevo. Since 1992, about 30 performances have been produced, ensuring MESS's status as one of the most promiment theatre events in the region. 
"When we said that this year we have received the troupes from 13 countries, we did not have statistics in mind, but 13 differences: 13 different viewpoints, 13 different languages, 13 different emotions, 13 different smiles, 13 different similarities -- joined in theatre," said the festival's executive producer, Nihad Kresevljakovic. 
"Our 13 is a lucky number this year … There are Belgians, French and Iranians, Slovenians and Croats, Bulgarians, Romanians, Serbs, Montenegrins and Kosovars, Latvians, Hungarians and the Dutch. As well as Bosnians. One King Lear came from Pristina, another from Belgrade ... One Hamlet spoke Serbian, the other, from Sarajevo, with a turban on his head, spoke Bosnian," Krezevljakovic said. 
"We hosted Peter Brook and Jan Fabre ... A fascinating Iranian director came here with a production that was a true place for dialogue between the West and the world of Islam. A Russian director staged a Croatian performance of Tolstoy's classic. 'Queen Margot' was directed by a Slovenian of Spanish origin, while a Macedonian-Italian production presented another Shakespeare play, 'Timon of Athens'. Bulgarians and Romanians addressed our Balkans … Together, all of us are engaged in building bridges!" he added. 
