21/06/2011
(Zaman, San Francisco Chronicle, World Bulletin, Trend News Agency - 21/06/11; Reuters, AP, AFP, Euronews, EurActiv, Guardian, BBC, RFE/RL, VOA, Zaman, Hurriyet - 20/06/11)
Turkish President Abdullah Gul urged his Syrian counterpart, Bashar al-Assad, on Monday (June 20th) to transform his country into a multi-party state, stressing that promises of reforms are "not enough". 
"Assad should clearly and precisely say: 'Everything has changed. We're transforming the system into a multi-party one. Everything will be organised according to the Syrian people's will, and I will be carrying out this process'," Gul said. 
Addressing an audience of supporters at Damascus University on Monday, Assad announced the beginning of a national dialogue that could pave the way for the adoption of a new constitution and the end of the Baath Party's more than four-decade totalitarian rule. 
In his more than hour-long televised address to the nation -- the third since anti-government protests began in March -- he also promised elections in August. 
While insisting that he would not carry out reforms amid chaos, Assad gave no indication that his regime is planning to put an end to violence in the country or that the security services would be held accountable for the crackdown on demonstrators. 
Rights groups estimate that at least 1,300 civilians, and more than 300 soldiers and police have been killed in clashes across the country since March, clashes that have forced thousands of Syrians to flee their homes. 
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, whose country is already providing shelter to more than 10,000 Syrian refugees, has condemned the crackdown on civilians as "savagery". 
Blaming the violence on opposition groups involved in a foreign conspiracy to sow chaos in the country, Assad said that "saboteurs" who have smeared Syria's image and weakened national security had to be isolated. 
Meanwhile, Turkish diplomats told Istanbul-based daily Hurriyet that many of the reforms Assad pledged on Monday were in line with those Turkey had already suggested. But they also echoed Gul's criticism of the vagueness clouding the promises for change, noting that the accusations he levelled at members of the opposition were counter-productive. 
"Assad will have to work with these groups, therefore his description of the opposition is not right," the daily quoted a diplomatic source as saying, speaking on condition of anonymity. "This is not a statement that might build a climate of confidence between rival groups." 
Syrian refugees in Turkey were not impressed by Assad's new promises and rejected his calls to return home, fearing they would face repression if they did, according to Hurriyet. 
"Ten families from the tents on the Syrian side of the border left three days ago for Jisr Al-Shughour, upon a call by government supporters, but we have not heard from them since. Their phones are closed, they have disappeared," the paper quoted Mohammed Feyzu, a Syrian refugee and opposition activist, as saying. 
Condemning the worsening violence in Syria, EU foreign ministers acknowledged the efforts Turkey and other countries in the region are making to deal with the humanitarian and other aspects of the crisis and promised to work with them. 
Calling on Damascus to halt the crackdown on civilians, they also said that the 27-nation bloc plans to expand its sanctions against Assad's regime. 
