31/08/2006
(AP, AFP, BBC, VOA, HINA, UN News Centre, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - 30/08/06)
With the trial against Momcilo Krajisnik drawing to a close, prosecutors at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) demanded on Tuesday (29 August) that the former top Bosnian Serb politician receive a life sentence. 
During the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Krajisnik, 61, served in several key positions, including as speaker of the Bosnian Serb assembly and a leading member of the Serb Democratic Party (SDS). He was also former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic's right-hand man. 
In a joint indictment against Krajisnik and former Bosnian Serb President Biljana Plavsic, UN prosecutors alleged that the two -- along with others, including Karadzic and former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic -- were involved in a host of crimes committed between 1 July 1991 and 30 December 1992. As participants in a joint criminal enterprise, they "planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided or abetted the planning, preparation or execution of the partial destruction of the Bosnian Muslim and Bosnian Croat national, ethnical, racial or religious groups," the indictment read. 
 The ICTY charged Krajisnik with two counts of genocide, five counts of crimes against humanity and one count of violations of the laws or customs of war. "Each count of the indictment individually, if found to be true, merits the highest possible sentence, regardless of the mode of liability, UN prosecutor Alan Tieger said in his concluding remarks Tuesday, more than 30 months after the trial began. "Therefore, based on the crimes committed by Krajisnik, the aggravated factors associated with them, the absence of substantial mitigating factors, it is our submission that Krajisnik should be sentenced to prison for life." 
Plavsic, who faced the same charges as Krajisnik, reached a deal with prosecutors, agreeing to plead guilty to persecution. The prosecution eventually dropped the other seven counts against her and in February 2003 she was was sentenced to 11 years in prison. 
The judges are expected to announce their verdict against Krajisnik on or before 29 September, the ICTY said at a press briefing Wednesday. 
In an unrelated development Wednesday, judges at the ICTY ordered Croatian journalist Josip Jovic to pay a fine of 20,000 euros after convicting him of contempt of court. A former editor-in-chief of the Croatian daily newspaper Slobodna Dalmacija, Jovic published a series of articles in late November 2000 about Croatian President Stipe Mesic and his testimony in a closed-door session before the ICTY more than two years earlier. 
Disregarding the UN prosecutors' order that he immediately discontinue publishing Mesic's statements or testimonies in December 2000, Slobodna Dalmacija published 21 additional excerpts of Mesic's closed session testimony. 
"His actions not only were contemptuous," the AP quoted presiding Judge Patrick Robinson as saying Wednesday, "but also stymied the tribunal's ability to safeguard the evidence of a protected witness and risked undermining confidence in the tribunal's ability to grant effective protective measures." 
Jovic described the case as a "legal absurdity" and said he would file an appeal. 
Commenting on Jovic's sentence, Mesic said it "is a message to all that they should stick to the law and international standards," the AP reported. 
