30/01/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 30/01/06
The Republika Srpska Parliament voted out the government Thursday (26 January) after Prime Minister Pero Bukejlovic and the Serbian Democratic Party lost the support needed to remain in power. Forty-four MPs voted against the government and 29 in favour, while 6 abstained. 
The loss of parliamentary support came after the Party of Democratic Progress (PDP) and its leader, Bosnian Foreign Minister Mladen Ivanic, left the ruling coalition and went into opposition, expressing dissatisfaction with the results achieved by Bukejlovic's cabinet during its 11 months in office. 
According to Bukejlovic, however, his government was doing a good job, having met budgetary targets and raised industrial production 20 per cent. The real reason for the political shift, he insists, is that some politicians were irritated by the "decisive fight against criminals and corruption" launched by the administration. 
In any case, the most serious candidate to become the new prime minister is Milorad Dodik, leader of the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD). He says he has the 42 MP signatures needed to obtain a mandate. 
Dodik previously held the prime minister's post from 1998 until 2001. 
The SNSD has pledged to take action against what it says are illegal privatisation activities, and would work to solve social problems. Ivanic's PDP says it is ready to become a partner in the new cabinet, though their support depends on the specific proposals put forth by the SNSD. 
A parliamentary majority is not easy to obtain. Eighteen different parties are represented in the legislature, though half of these have only one MP each. Analysts say the SNSD, even with PDP backing, will need the support of several minor parties, including the Bosniak parties SDA, SDP and Party for BiH. The SDA has indicated it would join the coalition. 
Despite losing its majority, the SDS is still asking RS President Dragan Cavic to give the mandate to someone from the party. Cavic, who also happens to be SDS leader, has promised to fulfil his constitutional obligation within ten days. 
"When they give me the list with 42 signatures I will talk to leaders of all parties who are supporting the new government, and I will ask them to show me the concept of the new government's work," Cavic said. 
