10/03/2008
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica –10/03/08
Milo Djukanovic, whose name is practically synonomous with Montenegro independence, took up the prime minister's post again in February. Having led the country through the conflict period of the 1990s and spearheaded its drive towards sovereignty, he is no stranger to challenges. And challenges certainly await his government – from building closer ties with EU and NATO to developing the country's energy sector and infrastructure. 
All parties in parliament are in favor of association with the EU. The real question is whether or not Djukanovic's government will be able to achieve concrete results in terms of EU requirements -- in particular, judicial reform, improved state administration and a stronger fight against corruption. Montenegro, which has a reputation for being a place where sentences are rarely handed down for corruption, is under pressure to show its committment to going beyond rhetoric and achieving the stated goals. 
To drive home its committment to an EU future, the ruling coalition has suggested that Montenegro could submit its application for membership during the first half of 2008, even though it only signed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement -- considered a first step on the path to accession -- in October. 
 "We are aware that some time has to pass from the moment of applying for membership to the moment of acquiring that status, and we are aware we must fulfil certain conditions, but we will succeed," former Prime Minister Zeljko Sturanovic, who stepped down due to health reasons, said at the start of the new year. 
 He announced that the government would adopt a national EU integration programme by May, outlining all the requirements on the path to membership along with a precise timetable for their implementation. 
While Brussels has offered encouragement, it has also cautioned the Montenegrin authorities not to overlook the considerable amount of work that remains to be done. 
 "Montenegro is facing new challenges," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said at the beginning of February. "State administration is still weak and must be improved at all levels. Action is necessary to reach concrete results in the fight against corruption and organised crime. Money laundering is still a critical area." 
 He added that while he "fully understands Montenegro is striving to become a candidate for EU membership", Europe wants that to happen after all the conditions are met. 
 "In the future period, the first and main task for Montenegro is to apply the interim agreement with the EU and resume with preparations for applying the SAA," Rehn said. "In practice, this means the governnment needs to pay attention to trade and customs, areas where state administration efficiency must be enhanced." 
 "The government must launch new institutions, such as the Council for Competition. Also, the public procurement system must be in line with EU laws and standards. Montenegro must open tenders for EU based companies. The rules of intellectual property must be respected," Rehn said. 
In addition to moving towards EU accession, Montenegro is also a member of NATO's Partnership for Peace. It joined the PfP in December 2006, six months after the split from Serbia. The country is slated to take part in 69 PfP programmes. 
Although the government, the defence ministry and most NGOs argue in favour of joining NATO, public support is much lower than it is for EU membership.Most surveys show that the population is divided into thirds: against joining NATO, in favour of joining NATO, and not having an opinion on the matter. 
Public opinion is more unified when it comes to key domestic issues. Ask nearly anyone in Montenegro, and they'll tell you about the need for a new highway connecting the seacoast to the mountainous north. A lack of good roads has been widely cited as a factor causing the north to be less developed than the central and southern part of Montenegro. The highway has been discussed for years, but concrete plans are only now getting underway. Construction is set to begin this autumn. 
 "We don't need papers about the project all the time, we need a highway," Djukanovic has said. 
Montenegro also faces other infrastructural problems, including not enough water lines. As the number of tourists rises, the prospect of water shortages looms. The government is preparing to take action by laying down new water pipelines to coastal towns. 
Improving energy efficiency is another challenge. "Lack of energy represents a serious threat for the future economic development of Montenegro. We need as soon as possible to allow investments in this field," says Petar Ivanovic, the head of the Agency for Foreign Investment Promotion. 
The government hopes to address the issue by building a succession of small-scale hydroelectric plants. After the authorities called a tender for exploring water capacities and construction of small hydroplants, 145 offers came in from 38 companies. Montenegro's leaders have their eyes set not only on meeting the country's energy needs, but building enough capacity to enable it to export power. 
 With the country proving increasingly attractive to visitors from abroad, Djukanovic and his administration will have to pave the way for Montenegro to best take advantage of its tourism potential. At the same time, the authorities may find themselves hard pressed to cushion the population against the inevitable shocks. Real estate prices, for instance, have already begun to skyrocket as foreigners -- mainly Britons and Russians -- demonstrate interest in coastal property. 
A disagreement has already broken out within the ruling coalition over how to handle the issue of foreign property ownership. Djukanovic's party favours total liberalisation of the marketplace, but one of its coalition partners, the Social Democratic Party (SPD), disagrees. 
 "2008 will be the year when strategic decisions regarding how we use our terrain must be made. Law on ownership is one of the pillars of every state organisation in history of civilisation. This year we must be wise enough if we want to avoid danger," says Parliament Speaker Ranko Krivokapic, who heads the SPD. 
Less than two years after independence, Montenegro thus faces an array of pressing issues and a need for decisive action on several fronts. As he takes up office again, Djukanovic enjoys what is perhaps the greatest political credibility of any public figure in the country. He may need to tap into those reserves often in the months ahead. 
