12/12/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times -- 12/12/06
At the start of next year, an 880 MgW-sized hole will appear on the Balkan energy market. Bulgaria, acting on an EU requirement, is set to close two Soviet-era units at its Kozloduy nuclear power plant. 
As a result, the country will become safer. But the closure will also reduce electricity exports to the region, which already suffering from energy shortages. The situation is serious enough to have prompted energy ministers from SEE countries to appeal to Bulgaria to postpone the closure until next spring -- a possibility that the EU Energy Commission has dismissed. Several countries in the region -- Albania, Greece, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia -- have considered imposing restrictions on the largest energy consumers during the first three months of the new year. 
The picture is no brighter down the road. Bulgaria must close two more units at Kozloduy in 2009, reducing the plant's output to 2,000 MgW. As electricity becomes scarcer, the laws of supply and demand ensure that prices will rise. The anticipated price next year is 550 euros per MgW of high voltage power, with increases of 10% to 15% after that. 
Other than Bulgaria, only Romania and Republika Srpska in Bosnia and Herzegovina can hope to maintain export surpluses in the energy market between 2007 and 2012. The other countries in the region are pursuing varied strategies to keep the lights on. In Macedonia, the tender for the December supply stream secured only a third of the desired 210m kWh, and at a price of 7.4 eurocents per kWh. To overcome the "Kozloduy problem", Macedonia has revved up the thermoelectric plant at Negotino – a strategic reserve that manufactures high-cost electricity using crude oil. 
Serbia, by contrast, has all the benefits -- and the costs -- that come with state subsidization. It managed to buy 500 million kWh for 4.8 eurocents per kWh, to be sold on the domestic market for 3.8 eurocents per kWh. The state price is the same for all, from citizens to the banks and steel industry, which are currently enjoying windfall profits. The cheapest electricity prices in Europe naturally lead to huge levels of consumption. So liberal is the use of electricity that consumption in the relatively warm month of October reached winter season levels. 
Power companies in the Balkans see the electricity shortage as an opportunity for the conquest of markets. Those who prove able to supply energy to the region in the coming years stand to gain an enormous long-term advantage. It is for this reason that Croatia plans to invest 5 billion euros in the energy sector between now and 2010. It is building thermoelectric and hydroelectric plants, as well as a submerged power transmission line linked to Italy via the Adriatic. 
In the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, eight small and medium size hydropower facilities, worth 2.5 billion euros, are being constructed. The first of these will be built by the Austrian consortium APET. 
Bulgaria, meanwhile, has completed a tender for its new nuclear power plant in Belane. With two 1,000 MgW units, it constitutes the largest investment in Bulgaria during the past quarter century. This 4 billion-euro project has gone to the Russian firm Atomstrojexport. However, there are some obstacles. The EU Energy Commissioner, Andris Piebalgs, has reminded Bulgaria that the project needs European Commission approval under the terms of the EUROATOM agreement. 
Serbia's electric company is thinking of buying one or two power plants in the region. That would solve problems during the medium term, while its new Kolubara facility -- planned for 2012 -- is being built. In their view, the investment would pay off in only five years' time. The Serbs are looking with envy at the Czech state company CEZ, which made a few large purchases of power plants and electricity distribution in Bulgaria, Poland and Romania, and now is participating in the tender for Kosovo's thermoelectric plant, negotiating in Republika Srpska, and preparing to invest some 4 billion euros at home over the next 10 years. CEZ is now the largest electricity supplier in Central and Southeast Europe, including Austria, and the sixth largest in Europe overall. 
Lack of electricity is not only a Balkan problem. Europeans are worried about a report by the Capgemini consulting group on energy market conditions. It found that production capacity has declined. Operators do not want enter in risky long-term investments, even as demand continues to grow. Belgium, France, Greece and Hungary found themselves in a complicated situation for three months in 2005, because producers' reserves ran short. 
To ensure stable conditions in the EU until 2030, an investment of around 700 billion euros is needed, say experts, with 30 billion during the period 2006-2010. At the moment, only a third of the required amount is planned. Worries about energy can no longer be called alarmist; the power failure in Western Europe at the beginning of November demonstrated that the reasons for concern are very real. Some 10m people -- mostly in France and Germany, but also in Austria, Belgium, Italy and Spain -- found themselves stuck in elevators or otherwise in the dark. The older EU member states are facing conditions they simply are not used to and have not planned for adequately. Something will have to be done. 
