18/08/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 18/08/11
Turkey launched an air operation aimed at 60 targets belonging to the PKK in northern Iraq on August 17th-18th, for the first time since last summer. 
The air operations were carried out in direct response to a PKK attack in Hakkari, near the Iraq border, earlier in the day that left 11 soldiers and one village guard dead, and several wounded. 
The results of the bombings are still unclear, but reports indicate laser guided "bunker buster" bombs were used for the first time, targeting the PKK's underground infrastructure and leadership. 
 Pressure has been mounting on Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan to take action against the rising tide of PKK violence. 
According to analysts and media reports, the air operation signals a sharp shift from rhetoric to action, indicating further operations, including the use of ground forces, could be in store. 
 However, to Nihat Ali Ozcan, author of the book 'Kurdistan Workers' Party: History, Ideology and Methods", Wednesday's events are not important "because it is only public diplomacy". 
 "There are strong signals [more operations will happen], but I'm not sure it could be manageable for the government," Ozcan told SETimes. 
Yasar Karayel, an MP from Erdogan's AKP, admits launching a new offensive against the PKK in Iraq wasn't on Ankara's agenda, at least until the end of Ramadan. 
"We have reached the point when words are meaningless," he told SETimes, echoing similar statements by Erdogan. "Turkey is not a country that will bend over to terrorism." 
But Karayel emphasises that the "Kandil [PKK headquarters] operations shouldn't be considered against Turkey's long-time peaceful policy towards its Kurdish population. Our message to them is that we know the PKK doesn't represent them," he added. 
 Ankara's next steps will be defined at Thursday's [August 18th] National Security Council meeting, chaired by President Abdullah Gul. 
Muharrem Ince, the main opposition CHP's parliamentary group deputy chairman, says his party is ready to support the government's initiatives in the anti-terrorism fight. However, he calls the air operation "a belated one". 
 "It should have happened long time ago, before the terrorists killed our sons," he told SETimes. 
"Both the Turkish authorities and the Turkish Kurd nationalist movement have moved to a more aggressive position in recent months," Hugh Pope, the International Crisis Group's Turkey project director, told SETimes. "Since the PKK is based in northern Iraq and has killed at least 38 Turkish soldiers in the past two months, it is not surprising therefore that the Turkish Air Force is striking out." 
 However, Pope said, the cross-border attacks will also introduce tension between Turkey and the Kurdistan Regional Government in Iraq, which has been largely absent for a few years during Turkey's "Democratic Opening". 
"The Kurds in Turkey are very disappointed that following the election on June 12th of this year, the new AKP government failed to embrace promised reform and the pursuit of Kurdish rights within a unified Turkey," explained Michael Gunter, a political science professor at Tennessee Technological University. He has written nine books on the Kurds. 
 "This [Turkey's attack] could lead to a renewal of the war or it could be the dark again before the light of real reform," Gunter told SETimes. 
Paul Kubicek, Turkey expert from Oakland University, is concerned about a new round of serious violence with the PKK. "This is unfortunate, given the past ceasefires and hope for a political settlement." 
 "With many Kurds increasingly sceptical of the AKP and the energy gone from the government's earlier 'Kurdish initiative', it may be that both sides figure they have more to gain by acting tough than by talking," he told SETimes. 
