29/09/2006
(EUobserver - 29/09/06; AFP, Newsroom Finland, Turkish Daily News, Makfax, Finnish EU Presidency - 28/09/06; International Herald Tribune, AP - 26/09/06)
There should be no pause in EU expansion after Bulgaria and Romania join the Union, Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, said on Thursday (28 September). 
"We need to maintain a policy that keeps the EU open to countries that are willing and able," Vanhanen said, addressing members of several Finnish parliament committees. "If we set further conditions -- conditions internal to the EU that potential candidate countries cannot influence -- we risk demoralising deserving candidates, for whom the prospect of EU membership, however distant, is a strong incentive to reform and live up to European standards." 
On Monday, European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso suggested that the EU should take a breather after Bulgaria and Romania's accession, allowing it to sort out its institutional and constitutional problems. 
With the two Balkan nations' entry on 1 January 2007, the number of member nations will reach 27. 
The Nice Treaty, which took effect in February 2003, obliges the Union to carry out institutional reform after the admission of its 27th member. A proposed constitutional treaty that would have helped remove the existing institutional barriers to the bloc's further expansion was put on ice last year after Dutch and French voters rejected it in separate referendums. 
Barroso voiced hope Tuesday that the EU would be able to carry out the needed institutional reforms by the end of 2008, so that it could honour its commitments to countries hoping to join it, including the Western Balkan nations and Turkey. 
Croatia -- the country widely seen as the next in line for EU accession -- is hoping to complete its entry talks by the second half of 2008 and become the Union's 28th member in 2009. Following Barroso's comments about a possible temporary break before new members are admitted, Croatian Foreign Minister Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic said EU hopefuls need more encouraging signals about their membership prospects, so that the reform process is not derailed. 
As the bloc agreed in June, the EU is expected to discuss the issue of future enlargement during a summit in December. 
Vanhanen cautioned on Thursday that pausing the process would be a "huge setback for Europe". 
"In practice this would mean shutting the door in Croatia's face, even though it is a deserving candidate," he told Finnish lawmakers. 
