19/11/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 19/11/07
Kosovo voters, frustrated over delays in resolving the province's status, rejected the current leadership in local and parliamentary elections Saturday (November 17th), handing a victory to former Kosovo Liberation Army commander Hashim Thaci and his Democratic Party of Kosovo (DPK). 
The DPK won around 34% of the vote, followed by the ruling Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) with 22%, according to preliminary results. However, Thaci has already acknowledged that his party's margin of victory will not allow it to govern alone. 
The Alliance for a New Kosovo finished third with 10%, while the Democratic League of Dardania, led by Nexhat Daci, was fourth. The reformist party ORA garnered only 4%, putting it in sixth place. 
"We have had the democratic elections as always and this is the victory for Kosovo," said Thaci, 39, who until now had seen his political fortunes checked by distrust over his militant background. The former guerrilla commander -- once known as "The Snake" -- had lost every prior election held in the province, starting in 2000. 
 International officials have praised the conduct of elections, saying they largely met global standards, but expressed concern about low turnout and a mass boycott by ethnic Serbs. 
Turnout, estimated at between 40% and 45%, was the lowest in any election since the 1998-99 conflict. By contrast, turnout in a 2001 vote was 64.3%. 
"We are alarmed by the very low turnout and we have to ask ourselves why it is so low," Reuters quoted Doris Pack, a member of the Council of Europe's negotiating team, as saying. "People in Kosovo are really fed up with their political situation." 
On Sunday, US State Department spokesman Sean McCormack said Washington was pleased with the pre-election campaign, the peaceful conduct of the vote, and the engagement of all Kosovo political parties in the process. But he voiced disappointment with the decision by most Kosovo Serbs to stay away from the polls. 
"The US expresses its compassion for the fact that Kosovo Serbs, stimulated by the Serbian government, didn't participate in the local and parliamentary elections," McCormack said. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn also said the Serb boycott was a disappointment. He appealed to the elected politicians "to work constructively for a sustainable status settlement as well as to facilitate progress on European integration". 
Only five Serbs showed up at eight polling centres in north Kosovo, according to local media reports. At one other polling centre, in Partesh, Serbs who wanted to vote were blocked by other members of their own community. The polling centre at the Serb enclave of Gracanica, meanwhile, recorded a 3% turnout, prompting words of praise from UNMIK head Joachim Ruecker. 
 "They should be commended considering they were under immense pressure," he said. Serbs were not the only ones to stage a boycott, however. The Vetevendosje (Self-Determination) movement, which opposes the international status negotiations, also called for voters to stay away. 
Ruecker, however, said it was unlikely that Vetevendosje was responsible for the low turnout. "I do not think this movement is that influential," he said. 
