14/04/2011
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 14/04/11
Debate over the lack of state-level air traffic control in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has intensified in recent months. Local media reports claim the government is losing significant amounts of revenue because it must rely on Croatia and Serbia to monitor the skies. 
 Under agreements signed in 1999 and 2000, the neighbouring countries provide air traffic control, meteorological services, technical support and exchange of air navigation information. The Dayton Peace Accords, however, stipulated that air traffic control is among the competencies of the BiH state. 
The press allegations about revenue losses are unfounded, BiH Directorate of Civil Aviation spokesperson Aleksandar Lalovic told SETimes. "BiH may not be providing these services at all, but it is still earning a significant amount of route fees," he said. 
In 2010 alone, he said, BiH earned route fees to the tune of 11,000 euros, whereas Serbia and Croatia collected 7,500 and 5,000 euros respectively. A similar ratio is expected this year. 
 Experts say BiH has not been able to assert control over its skies because it lacks a state-level air navigation services agency. Plans are under way, however, to establish such an institution, test an air traffic control system at specific locations throughout the country, and get it ready for operations. 
 "This process will ensure the meeting of the technical requirements for providing services in the BiH air space," Lalovic said. 
The agency, BHANSA, will take over control in phases, beginning this month until the end of 2012. The main factors affecting the process are staffing, training the 54 air traffic controllers and integrating the BiH air control system with that of neighbouring and European countries. 
 "The BiH Council of Ministers has passed an Airspace Management Strategy which envisions establishing all the agencies that are necessary to provide air navigation services, including purchasing of equipment and staff training," said Drago Radic, a civil aviation adviser to BiH's transportation and communications ministry. 
 Lalovic's directorate is the only state-level civil aviation agency in BiH and is affiliated with the ministry. It issues air traffic rules and legislation but is not directly in charge of providing air traffic control services. 
 Regarding the issue of cost, Radic reassured the public that BiH has no financial obligations. "Air carriers pay fees for the services offered [by Croatia and Serbia], and BiH receives approximately 27% from the two aforementioned service providers." 
Croatian Air Navigation Control provides air traffic services up to 10,000 feet over the entire territory of BiH and up to 66,000 feet in BiH's western half. Traffic over the eastern part of the country is handled by Serbia's air traffic authority. 
Meanwhile, the country's two entities -- Republika Srpska and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina – each operate their own civilian air navigation directorates, in apparent violation of the BiH Constitution. It stipulates that air traffic control is an exclusive jurisdiction of state-level institutions. 
