24/08/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 24/08/07
A monument to the fictional boxer Rocky Balboa was unveiled in Zitiste, a small town of about 2,000 people in northern Serbia, on August 18th. The entire monument, modeled after one built in Philadelphia in 1983, is around 5m tall. The statue depicting Balboa, played by actor Sylvester Stallone, is 2.60m tall. 
The people of Zitiste see the project as a way to change the image of their town and attract tourists. "We wanted to create a sort of tourist story. The goal is to make this town a brand. Zitiste has until now been known only for bad things -- floods, the pig plague. There are many fans of Italian soccer clubs here and Stallone and Rocky just fit in," Zitiste Mayor Zoran Babic said. 
Prior to building the monument, the Rocky Balboa Citizens' Association, comprising mostly young people from the town, was formed in Zitiste. Inspired by the construction of a monument to kung-fu legend Bruce Lee in Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina, they came up with the idea for one honouring Rocky. 
Association representative Bojan Marceta said that all it took was rumours of the monument to attract sponsors and numerous journalists to Zitiste. Croatian sculptor Boris Staparac heard about the plan and volunteered his services. "The idea to build a monument and devote it to a movie hero is a pretty strange idea, and I am incredibly interested and attracted to all wonders and strange things," Staparac said. 
The residents had to get the green light from US sculptor Thomas Schomberg, who did the original statue in Philadelphia. Marceta says that Schomberg approved the monument and gave up half of his fee to make the job easier for Zitiste's people. 
Balboa was a logical choice for the monument, the association members say. The movie hero went from failed boxer to successful fighter, and eventually became champion of the world -- beating all his opponents and conquering his own demons. This, say Zitiste residents, is just what they plan to do in order to help their town prosper. 
