18/07/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times – 18/07/11
Top diplomats from the US, Turkey and 30 other Western and Arab countries, including the Libyan opposition, gathered in Istanbul on Friday (July 15th) to discuss a political solution to the Libyan conflict, while co-ordinating aid for the rebels. 
The Libya Contact Group meeting, the fourth since it was formed in March, differed from previous ones in focusing on the post-Gadhafi transition, rather than on NATO's military campaign. 
In a major diplomatic move, the Group announced it formally recognises the opposition National Transitional Council (TNC) as Libya's legitimate governing authority. Beyond the symbolic value, this decision could also lead to the release of billions of dollars in frozen Libyan assets to the country's rebels. 
The meeting also established overarching principles for a political transition in Libya, which will reflect the principles outlined in the TNC's road map, including the formation of a national congress, an interim government, and a supreme executive council. 
Turkish officials highlighted the importance of the international community making progress regarding the Libyan crisis before the beginning of the holy month of Ramadan in August. 
"It is difficult, but possible," Burhan Kayaturk, ruling AKP MP and spokesman for the Foreign Affairs Commission, told SETimes, adding that to achieve long-term peace in Libya, the Western allies need to understand the specifics of the region, something Turkey is ready to assist them in. 
"We know the reality of this region and can explain better Western standards to Libya and vice versa," he argues. "We carry the Western democratic and economic standards in our country and are willing to integrate them in Libya." 
Meanwhile, while visiting Istanbul for the Group meeting, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton warned Turkey about its own democracy, including efforts to limit media and restrict freedom of expression. 
"People across the Middle East and North Africa are seeking to draw lessons from Turkey's experience," she said. 
MP Faruk Logoglu, an adviser to the main opposition CHP leader and former ambassador to the United States, believes that by continuing its efforts at limiting democracy on the domestic front, Turkey might lose any "model role" in the Middle East. 
"There was no place for such topics as human rights and democracy in the AKP's foreign policy towards the Middle East. Our government was reminded of those values after the Arab uprising," he told SETimes. "Our people are afraid to speak up, even on their personal cell phones. Is that the democracy the Arab people are following?" 
The opposition is also dissatisfied with Turkey's Libya positions. "Our country should not be part of a decision that might divide Libya, while Gadhafi in fact, is still in power," Logoglu says. 
Tayyar Ari, head of the International Relations Department at Uludag University in Bursa, says the only concern of Turkish diplomats regarding Libya right now is time. 
"The longer the [Libyan] conflict gets extended, the harder it will be for Turkish leaders to stand behind their position in front of their own people," he told SETimes. 
"The fact that Turkey is supporting the US, NATO, turning away from Gadhafi and approaching the rebels is not a problem for AKP in domestic and foreign politics so far," he says, adding that Turkey's ambition to be a model in the Middle East and hosting such international meetings will also catalyse its domestic democratic reforms. 
