09/06/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 09/06/12
German Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Thursday (June 7th) that there was need for a stronger political union that is open to all EU countries willing to join in, even if it would mean creating a two-speed Europe. 
A deeper fiscal and political integration, which implies ceding more powers to EU institutions, is the best response to the ongoing crisis in the 17-nation eurozone, she said. 
"We need a political union first and foremost. Step by step we must from now on give up more competences to Europe, and allow Europe more powers of control," Merkel said in an interview with German television ARD on Thursday. 
Her remarks came ahead of the EU leaders' regular summit on June 28th. The German chancellor made it clear however that the upcoming meeting was unlikely to produce any major breakthrough. 
"I don't believe that there will be one single summit that will decide on a big bang," said Merkel. "But what we have been doing for some time, and on which a working plan will certainly be presented in June, is to say we need more Europe." 
On Wednesday, the European Commission (EC) proposed a new directive on banking resolution as a step towards a continent-wide banking union. The legislation calls for closer co-ordination between countries and introduces new EU-wide rules for bank recovery and resolution that will ensure the means for more decisive preventive action and response to problems in the sector. 
But not all agree with the plan. 
"The more the regulation, the bigger the administrative costs of running a business, the more difficult it becomes to do anything, and the less credits the banks will be willing to give. So, creating more and more and more administrative burdens on the private sector is not the best policy," Nikolay Vassilev, a former investment banker, former deputy prime minister told SETimes. 
"If they have to do it, they will have to start with the West European banks," as the banks in Bulgaria and Eastern Europe are not the ones to "have made the biggest mistakes." "They should start with regulating the governments," Vassilev said. 
But according to Marin Lessenski, a policy analyst at the Open Society Institute in Sofia, there is definitely a need for steps to strengthen the EU. 
"Bulgaria needs the EU, so that the stronger and united it is, the better," he told SETimes. "From that point of view, any move to impose common decisions is much better than nations taking their own individual decisions." 
Bulgaria should join any such unions -- political or banking -- but should carefully examine the details, Lessenski added. 
"The situation in Europe is really critical," the analyst stressed, noting that there were two alternatives before the EU. 
