01/11/2012
By Menekse Tokyay, Svetla Dimitrova and Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times -- 01/11/12 
Turkish municipalities are developing sister city relations with their counterparts in Balkans, as the two sides aim to boost economic, cultural, educational and people-to-people contacts to foster mutual understanding and co-operation. 
Since Izmir signed Turkey's first sister city agreement with Melbourne, Australia, in 1992, the number of agreements has exploded to nearly 1,000, many signed in the past five years. 
Turkish municipalities have agreements with cities all over the globe, but geographic, cultural and historical ties to the Balkans have led municipalities in Turkey to sign many agreements with Balkan and EU member states. 
Bulgaria tops the list with more than 90 agreements with Turkish municipalities, followed by Germany (67), Greece (64), Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) (52) and Macedonia (30). 
Plamen Ralchev, assistant professor at the University of National and World Economy in Sofia, said that sister city relations provide intangible but vital avenues for public-to-public communication, mutual understanding, confidence building as well as "smart policy outcomes." 
"Durable trust and experience working together on joint projects make up a conjuncture in which shared ideas construct a common future. Opening wide public communication opportunities not only improves dialogue and understanding, it may also bring larger economic and political benefits and advantages," Ralchev told SETimes. 
Tekirdag municipality in the Marmara region of Turkey has eight sister city agreements, including with Techirghiol in Romania, Kircaali (Kardzhali) and Sliven in Bulgaria, and Kavala and Komotini in Greece. 
The sister cities have held joint festivals and other exchanges, bringing together artists, journalists, business leaders, citizens and public officials. 
"Our relationship with the sister cities aims to exchange our ideas in every moment of the life, to boost friendship, and to develop our common history as well as bilateral tourism opportunities," Nurcan Ildiz, press and public relations manager of Tekirdag municipality, told SETimes. 
"Thanks to the festivals we have organised, we found a fruitful platform to know each other's traditions, and ways of doing things. We all share a common Balkan geography and such city twinning initiatives serve to boost such ties," Ildiz said. 
The town of Sliven, Bulgaria, has sister city relationships with 11 municipalities, including Tekirdag. 
Svetomir Minchev, head of the Public Relations and International Co-operation Department at the municipality of Sliven, said the geographic proximity of Sliven and Tekirdag facilitates frequent contacts, as does Turkey's EU membership aspirations. 
The mayors of the two sister cities both also serve as the heads of two regional organisations in Thrace (Trakya). Sliven Mayor Kolyo Milev is the chairman of the Trakya Regional Association of Municipalities, while Tekirdag Mayor Adem Dalgic chairs Trakyakent, the corresponding structure of the municipalities in the European part of Turkey. 
Minchev said the excellent relationship between the two mayors has set the stage for contacts not only between the two cities, but also between regional organisations in Thrace. 
"Cross-border and investment projects and cultural exchanges are on the agenda now. Both sides wish to mobilize their municipal resources and the funding available under EU programmes for the implementation of joint projects in the region," Minchev said. 
Turkey and Romania upgraded relations to the level of strategic partnership last year, and sister city agreements help to deepen the level of co-operation. 
Turkey's ambassador to Bucharest, Omur Solendil, said excellent bilateral relations at the government level are reflected in co-operation between the local governments as well. 
"We believe that town twinning arrangements are instrumental in promoting cross-border projects of mutual benefit as well as fostering cultural and social exchanges," Solendil told SETimes. 
Barlad, Romania, and Selcuklu, Turkey are sister cities whose story is telling of the success and potential benefits of sister city agreements. 
Many in Barlad see the close relation with Selcuklu through an economic prism, after a Turkish company, Kombassan, bought in 2000 the local ball-bearing factory, the largest employer in the 70,000 person town. 
After an investment of $120 million in the last 12 years, the factory had a turnover of about $100 million last year. The bearing manufacturer also employs 2,400 people, making it one of the biggest employers in Eastern Romania, a region which severely lacks foreign investment. 
"They have brought back to life the economic engine of the town at a time when factories were closing down one after another," Daniel Vlad, a 37-year-old local, told SETimes. 
"No one would have imagined such an economic success story in this little town. Most of us have always had this perception of Turkey only through history. It's good to see the Turkish now as economic invaders as well," he said jokingly. 
