03/10/2007
(AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, Bloomberg, BBC, Wiener Zeitung - 02/10/07)
Austrian officials said on Tuesday (October 2nd) that two people, both citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), have been arrested in connection with a foiled attempt to bomb the US Embassy in Vienna the previous day. 
 The first suspect, identified as 42-year-old Asim C., was trying to enter the embassy, when his backpack set off metal detectors at the doors. When security personnel stopped him and alerted police, the man tried to run off. He abandoned the backpack in the next street in Vienna's 9th district, where many other embassies are located, and was arrested a short while later. 
The bag was found to contain two hand grenades, other explosive material and nails. Suicide bombers have used similar combinations in an effort to cause as much damage as possible. 
Erik Buxbaum, the Austrian interior ministry's public security director, told reporters that it is still unclear whether the grenades could have gone off, as they were not fitted with detonators. 
"Had [the backpack] exploded, it would have had an enormous shrapnel effect," said Doris Edelbacher, the chief spokeswoman for Austria's federal counterterrorism office. 
Experts, she said, were also analysing a book reportedly containing Islamic content and a CD or DVD also found in the backpack. 
Austrian officials said the suspect, who is unemployed and has received psychiatric care several times over the past years, appeared confused. 
During the interrogation he told police that another Bosnian national, Mehmed D., 34, had asked him to take the backpack to the US mission. Late Monday, that suspected accomplice was arrested in Tulln, a town about 25km west of Vienna, where both men lived. 
 Mehmed D. has denied any involvement in the case. Edelbacher said it appeared that the first suspect was trying to implicate others. 
An AP report quoted Buxbaum's spokesman, Rudolf Gollia, as saying that Asim C. had called the embassy prior to the incident, but offered no other details. 
While investigators try to establish the motive behind his attempted embassy attack, authorities downplayed speculation about a possible link to radical Islam. 
 "We can't say anything at the moment about a possible motive," Buxbaum said. "To talk about an Islamist background would be premature. We can neither confirm that nor rule it out." 
He also told reporters that police had found about 0.5kg of plastic explosives of a type often used in the former Yugoslavia during a search of Asim C.'s home in Tulln. 
Most of the Bosniaks, comprising the majority of BiH's population of about 4.5 million people, are known to practice a moderate form of Islam, but signs of radicalisation have emerged in the wake of the 1992-1995 conflict in the country. 
About two weeks ago, three Austrian citizens of Arab origin were arrested in connection with an Islamist video posted on the internet in March, warning Austria and Germany to pull their military personnel out of Afghanistan or face attacks. 
