04/05/2009
(Sofia Echo - 17/04/09; SNA - 16/04/09; EurActiv - 15/04/09; AFP, Reuters, Euobserver, European Parliament - 14/04/03)
This June, 375 million eligible voters living in the EU's 27 member states will choose their representatives for the European Parliament (EP), one of the three main decision-making bodies of the Union. MEPs are elected every five years. The upcoming vote will be the largest trans-national election ever held. 
 It could also be marred by record-low turnout. Only 34% of respondents in a recent Eurobarometer survey were sure they would cast their ballots, while 15% said flat out that they would not vote. 
The poll, conducted between mid-January and mid-February among 27,218 citizens from all the EU nations, found that 62% did not know the date of EP elections in their country and that 53% were simply not interested in the topic. 
"The age group that is the least likely to vote are students (27% will definitely not vote) and in general respondents aged 15-24 (25%)," Eurobarometer found. "The probability of voting is highest for respondents who were 20 or more years old when they finished education (40% will definitely vote), managers (38%) and retired (36%)." 
Seeking to stir more enthusiasm, particularly among youth, the current EP has created profiles on popular free-access social networking websites such as Facebook, MySpace and Youtube. 
Why the indifference? According to Eurobarometer, the results probably do not indicate growing scepticism about the EU in general, but rather a widespread belief that the elections will make no tangible difference. 
Many Europeans, moreoever, appear to know little about what the EP does. Only around half of those polled were aware that the EU's budget is determined jointly by member states and the EP, or that the parliament and member states have an equal role in making legislative decisions. The same number were unaware that MEPs are elected directly by citizens. 
Even fewer, however, realised that all EU countries do not have the same number of MEPs. 
The information published on the online social media sites, including dozens of videos on YouTube, is aimed at helping European voters fill in potential gaps in their knowledge about EU institutions, particularly the EP, and serve as a meeting place for discussions on various issues. 
The countries where likely voter participation was highest were those where voting is mandatory. Belgium and Luxembourg, both of which require their citizens to go to the polls, topped the list with 70% and 62% respectively. 
Two countries in Southeast Europe -- Greece (62%) and Cyprus (52%) -- also show comparatively high levels of interest. At the same time, only 48% of respondents from both nations told Eurobarometer they would definitely go to the polls in June. While it would exceed the expected EU average, such a turnout would be lower than that recorded in the 2004 European elections in Greece (63%) and in Cyprus (71%). 
Cyprus joined the EU five years ago and citizens of the Greek-run part of the divided island are keenly aware of the leverage membership gives them in efforts to achieve reunification. They will again send six representatives to the next EP. 
Greece, however, will have to pick its 22 new MEPs, down from 24 currently, in its seventh EU-wide elections since it joined the bloc in 1981. 
Elsewhere in the region, the results were more mixed. While Eurobarometer found that overall interest in the EP elections was also high in Romania (56%) and Bulgaria (48%), it is uncertain whether this interest will translate into actual participation. 
When the two countries held a by-election to elect MEPs following their accession in 2007, turnout was dismally low. At around 29% in both, they were far below the EU-wide average of 45.5% during the previous regular election, in 2004. 
The current survey results show a slight upswing, with 31% of Bulgarians and 34% of Romanians saying they plan to cast their votes in June. 
Both countries, like Greece, are seeing a drop in their number of MEPs. There will be 33 Romanian MEPs in the next assembly, down from the current 35. Bulgaria will have 17 parliamentary seats after the June elections, one less than it currently has. 
People in the region -- and in the bloc as a whole -- are relatively consistent when it comes to primary issues of concern. According to the survey, Greeks are the most worried about unemployment (83%) and economic growth (77%). 
In Bulgaria and Romania, the economy is the top issue (65% in both countries). Bulgarians, however, are also concerned about crime (56%), as are respondents from Cyprus (55%). 
Those results are generally in accord with the bloc as a whole, where unemployment (57%) and economic growth (52%) were the top two issues. 
Two-thirds of the respondents in both Greece and Cyprus, and 58% of those in Romania, said they wanted to see the EP play a more important role than it currently does. Only 42% of the Bulgarian respondents shared that view. 
Seventy-eight percent of people in Greece, 72% of those in Cyprus, 61% in Bulgaria and only 39% in Romania agreed that they would be better protected in the face of the current economic crisis if their country adopted measures and applied them in co-ordination with other EU nations. 
The seventh EP elections since 1979 will be held from June 4th to 7th and will produce a legislature comprising 736 members -- 49 fewer than the current parliament. 
Bulgaria, Greece and Romania are among the majority of EU nations where voters will cast their ballots on June 7th, while Cyprus will vote on the 6th. 
