11/08/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 11/08/10
Just four months after his most recent indictment, alleged drug trafficker Darko Saric now faces accusations of money laundering. On Monday (August 9th), Serbian prosecutors charged him and eight others, saying they used drug money to invest in hotels and farms in Vojvojdina. 
Besides Saric, the accused are Radovan Strbac and his wife Dubravka Strbac, Stevica Kostic, Zoran Copic, Andrija Krlovic, Marinko Vucetic, Predrag Milosavljevic and Nebojsa Jestrovic. While seven of them are in custody, Saric and Copic are still at large. 
 According to the Special Prosecutor for Organised Crime, Miljko Radisavljevic, they used about 20m euros gained from the sale of cocaine to obtain bank guarantees, which were then used for the privatisation of publicly-owned companies. 
The money, Radisavljevic says, was invested in the Senta-based Mladi Borac company, the Novi Sad-based firm Putnik, Mitrosrem in Sremska Mitrovica and the Subotica-based Palic company. A financial investigation into those companies is under way. 
The accused, except for Saric, did not directly participate in the smuggling of drugs, but were allegedly responsible for channelling the ill-gotten revenues into legal business and financial streams. 
Under the scheme, several offshore companies were established to transfer the money to Serbia, where it could then be paid into the accounts of local companies, Radislavljevic said. Part of the money was deposited in cash in the Novi Sad-based Metals Bank. 
Serbian media sources estimate that Saric is worth more than 100m euros, earned mainly through drug trafficking. In April, the special prosecution filed charges against him and 19 others suspected of smuggling 2.5 tonnes of cocaine from South America. 
As for this newer money laundering case, "Darko Saric and Zoran Copic are still at large and for that reason we have proposed that they be tried in absentia. The prosecution believes that owing to the complexity of the case, it is necessary that all the accused be tried in a single proceeding," Radisavljevic said. 
 If convicted and caught, Sarco could spend dozens of years in prison. Serbia passed a new law against money laundering in March, aiming to beef up the fight against corruption and meet international standards. 
Serbian police have said Saric may be hiding in the region. According to Montenegrin police chief Veselin Veljovic, however, new information has come to light suggesting that he has left the Balkans and gone to South Africa. 
Serbian police chief Milorad Veljovic told SETimes that police are doing everything to find Saric and his associates. 
"It is not only in the interest of the Serbian police and state, but also in the interest of the Balkan region as a whole," Veljovic said. Police findings, he added, indicate Saric is certainly not in Serbia, but in the interest of the investigation he didn't want to go into precise details about the suspect's location.
