24/01/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 24/01/06
Ibrahim Rugova led the campaign for peace and democracy in Kosovo and earned the world's respect for his principled stance against violence, US President George W. Bush said in a telegram sent Monday (23 January) to Nexhet Daci, Kosovo's acting president. 
"The loss of that voice at this decisive time for Kosovo is particularly tragic. Let me assure you that the United States remains committed to working with all the people of Kosovo to build a future that is stable, democratic and prosperous," Bush said in the message. "The US has lost a true friend. Throughout years of conflict, Ibrahim Rugova was the voice of reason and moderation that helped Kosovo's people lay the groundwork for a peaceful future," he added. 
Bush was among the many world leaders and international figures to send messages honouring Rugova, who died Saturday after battling lung cancer for several months. As preparations continue for Rugova's funeral Thursday, Albania, Macedonia and Montenegro already have appointed delegations to travel to Pristina for the event. 
Despite bitter cold and heavy snow, mourners on Monday began arriving in Pristina by the hundreds of thousands to pay homage to Rugova, whose body is currently lying in state at the Kosovo Assembly. 
"I will wait here until I honour the president for the last time. He was the biggest man," said Muharrem Gashi, a resident of Pristina. 
The mourning book has been signed by all of Kosovo's top politicians. President Rugova "became and remains a champion of the independence of Kosovo", Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi wrote, adding that the president had changed the political and cultural processes in the province. 
For 16 years, Rugova led the largest political party in Kosovo, the Democratic League for Kosovo. He was elected president on 4 March 2002 and re-elected in December 2004. 
On Monday, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer expressed his profound condolences, stressing that Rugova would be remembered for the "brave and remarkable" opposition to violence and for his commitment to the idea of a fully democratic, peaceful and multiethnic Kosovo. The NATO chief also voiced confidence that Rugova's example would further guide the people of Kosovo at a moment crucial to the province's future. 
