12/09/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 12/09/11
Kosovo's parliament is scheduled to soon take up a bill that would establish a separate television channel serving Serb viewers. Under both the Ahtisaari Plan and the constitution, the Kosovo public broadcaster RTK is required to provide this separate channel, to be known as RTK2. 
Dukagjin Gorani, an adviser to Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, says the government is committed to meeting this obligation. 
The second channel, he said, would be a copy of the existing RTK in terms of its structures, but would broadcast in Serbian, with 20% to 30% of its programming in the languages of other minorities. 
"It's about two channels within the RTK -- one in Albanian, one in Serbian and [the languages of] other communities -- with the same extended board of management and the respective directors," he told SETimes. 
But organisations representing Serb media in Kosovo say the bill before parliament is unacceptable. They want to ensure the channel is "totally independent", even though it will be financed with public funds. 
Moreover, they argue, the bill does not specify that the second channel will be exclusively for the Serb community -- a provision they say is required under the constitution and the Ahtisaari Plan. 
Nenad Milenkovic, the acting director of the Serb media network TV Mreza, tells SETimes that the draft "does not guarantee independence, professionalism and financial independence for the TV channel". 
"These are the three main points for which we have objections and we consider that such a channel does not benefit the Kosovo Serbs. As proposed according to the draft law, I don't know whose service this channel would be," Milenkovic told SETimes. 
He says that Kosovo Serb journalists have proposed that the new channel be fully separate from RTK1, both financially and editorially. 
"This channel would be created with the existing capacities, TV Mreza and the independent productions that want to be part of it," he adds. 
RTK1, he says "is very influenced by politics". 
Gorani insists the draft measure is best for the Serb community. "It is the most logical and most functional solution," he says, adding that a part of the Serb community represented in the government and in parliament favours it. 
A version introduced earlier in the summer ended up before the Constitutional Court, which struck down a provision that would have taxed citizens to help pay for RTK2. As the period for public comment draws to a close, lawmakers are preparing to consider the amended version. 
"A second TV channel for the Serb community and other communities would be good news for the non-Albanian communities in Kosovo; it would recreate a sense of community within Kosovo. If they want to throw away this chance, they would lose a good opportunity," Gorani says. 
