29/04/2013
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 29/04/13 
Independent state oversight institutions have contributed to the effectiveness and transparency of military, police and intelligence services across the Balkans, but analysts said the institutions must remain vigilant in their efforts to depoliticise the security sector. 
Croatia founded the office of the ombudsman in 1992, and has particularly improved its security sector oversight and associated reforms during the EU and NATO accession process. 
"By establishing a parliamentary committee for intelligence oversight, the civil oversight of intelligence has improved because the committee members are experts, not solely political appointees," Sandro Knezovic, a research fellow at the Zagreb Institute for International Relations, told SETimes. 
Knezovic said Croatia's membership action plan and the Partnership for Peace Programme -- both part of the NATO accession process -- significantly reduced the stigma of the security sector in the post-conflict period, and the EU accession process depoliticised the sector. 
Similarly, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) established an ombudsman as the first independent state oversight institution in 1996. The country also has a parliamentary military commissioner, created in 2009. 
"This body was established by BiH's parliament and its duties are to protect military personnel's human rights. It is one of the success stories and has achieved high marks from soldiers, society at large as well as the international community," Emsad Dizdarevic, researcher at the Sarajevo Centre for Security Studies, told SETimes. 
Dizdarevic said significant improvements were made once the three warring sides were unified into a single military and intelligence service. "Today, we have one civil agency [which is] officially depoliticised," Dizdarevic added. 
Experts agree that some oversight challenges are common in all West Balkan countries. 
"[T]here are groups which challenge the right to question military, police or intelligence agencies as they are perceived as being the primary protectors of national sovereignty. Another common challenge is that politicians are not willing to secure the financial transparency of security institutions," Sonja Stojanovic Gajic, director of the Belgrade Centre for Security Policy, told SETimes. 
Montenegro and Serbia established their first independent oversight institutions in 2004, and analysts in both nations said there remains room for progress. 
Montenegro adopted a legal and institutional framework which includes advanced mechanisms of control and oversight, Emir Kalac of the Podgorica Centre for Democracy and Human Rights, said. 
"Although significant steps were made such as [adopting] The Law on Parliamentary Oversight of Defense and Security Sector, there are still delays in areas like personal data oversight, treatment of prisoners and discrimination," Kalac told SETimes. 
Kalac said the politicisation of the security sector has been the biggest obstacle in implementing reforms, given the Montenegro ruling parties have not changed. 
"Parliament and its committee on security should bring together external oversight mechanisms, especially independent institutions and civil sector and media, to improve oversight of the government," Kalac added. 
Serbia has institutional and legislative structures and several institutions within the government and parliament as well as independent oversight bodies, according to Stojanovic Gajic. 
"Some of them do their work, others do not. Parliamentary oversight is still very weak, primarily because the politicians and the MPs are not interested in controlling the security institutions. The situation improved a bit with the security defence committee since the last elections, but it is still at the beginning because the committee is very passive... does not act proactively and does not support other oversight mechanisms," Stojanovic Gajic told SETimes. 
She said the ombudsman and commissioner for freedom access to information have so far shown the greatest results. 
"[S]ecurity sector officials only want to proclaim reforms are taking place, [but] ... the fact that we have institutions does not mean that they are functioning. There is more to be done to make them work properly," Stojanovic Gajic said. 
 What should regional governments do to increase oversight and transparency of the security sector? Share your thoughts with us in the comments space.  
