27/05/2005
(FENA, PBS BiH, B92 -- 24/05/05)
While the police sector in Bosnia and Herzegovina might be competent to tackle local crime, it needs critical reforms to fight organised crime on the national level, EUFOR Commander David Leakey told a press conference on Tuesday (24 May). In offering to assist authorities, Leakey stressed that EUFOR is neither a police force nor a tax collection agency, and that the relevant BiH institutions must conduct such tasks. 
Organised crime is one of the country's gravest problems, operating within a framework of parallel structures that cheats the government out of revenue, Leakey said. Revenue that is lost through these channels is needed for education, health, pensions and economic regeneration, he said, adding that some of these crime networks are the same organisations that siphon funds to support and protect indicted war criminals. 
On 3 May, EUFOR launched a joint operation with local authorities in BiH to combat border-related organised crime -- targeting smugglers and those who destroy forests in BiH. 
However, Leakey stressed that EUFOR is not a police force and cannot undertake police work. Nor can it act as a tax collection agency or undertake forestry management. Rather, he said, EUFOR's task is to support the institutions and agencies responsible for those areas. 
EUFOR can make a difference at the strategic level, with planning and information sharing and at a tactical level with direct support, he said. 
"Our troops are mobile and deployable anywhere in BiH, with a command and control organisation to match. We can use our helicopters, our surveillance capabilities and our capacity to undertake operations for long periods in support of the police and other law enforcement agencies," Leakey said. 
According to a recent survey, eight out of ten BiH citizens believe that organised crime and corruption is affecting their daily lives. Respondents cited drug trafficking, burglary and corruption as the main criminal activities. 
"Organised crime and corruption is a problem which affects every person in this country," said Leakey. "Criminal networks and their parallel structures undermine the stability, confidence, growth and prosperity of BiH. They risk jeopardising this country's progress towards integration with Europe." 
EUFOR has supported the State Border Service and the Indirect Tax Administration in areas where they have been short of manpower or capability. As a result, EUFOR soldiers have played a key role in recent seizures of drugs and many other illegal or smuggled goods. 
Leakey noted that, while successful, the operation had only "peeled away the first layer of the onion" and that there was more detailed and collaborative work to be done.
