16/02/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 16/02/09
A new round of negotiations between Macedonia and Greece over the name dispute occurred in New York last week. Although UN negotiator Matthew Nimetz did not offer any new proposals for the 17-year dispute, he asked the two sides to maintain a positive atmosphere that would facilitate a solution. 
Greek negotiator Adamantios Vassilakis and newly designated Macedonian negotiator Zoran Jolevski discussed at the February 11th meeting how to resume the negotiations that had stalled since October 2008. 
Observers do not expect solutions soon, since upcoming Macedonian elections and European Parliament elections in Greece will politicise the environment. Still, the two sides agreed that the process within the UN would continue. 
"I hope that we will focus on more concrete talks ... in order to see whether we can come to a compromise," Nimetz told Voice of America. 
Jolevski said Macedonia hopes to find a solution as soon as possible in order to ensure integration of the country in NATO and the EU. 
Last week, however, Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis said a "series of provocations from Skopje" were setting back relations. Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski shot back at the Munich Security Forum that Greece was undermining regional peace and security with its behaviour. 
Meanwhile, many events that may affect the countries' ability to bridge their differences have occurred. The Greek daily Kathimerini reported that negotiations between Skopje and Athens were entering a new phase with Barack Obama becoming US president. "I think that in due time this US administration will present its view and we should leave it up to [the United States] to answer this question," Nimetz said. 
The Macedonian government's move to name the central North-South Highway "Alexander the Great" offended Greece, with Bakoyannis calling it a "step back" in relations. 
"I cannot understand why a country cannot use those names because you can find them as a street in Rome, a city in Egypt and different items in many countries," Gruevski said. 
He said he hopes that Greece would, as a neighbour, help Macedonia to access NATO and the EU. 
In the meantime, Greece has assumed the OSCE presidency. Some analysts in Macedonia believe the name battle can spill over into this organisation. Nonetheless, Bakoyannis announced that she would visit every OSCE member country, which would include Macedonia. Foreign Minister Antonio Milososki has said Skopje will welcome her. 
