22/07/2005
(The New York Times, Zaman, Xinhua, Journal of Turkish Weekly - 22/07/05; AFP, Reuters, AP, Turkish Press, UPI, Journal of Turkish Weekly - 21/07/05)
Turkey is drafting amendments to its anti-terrorism law to give authorities greater powers in their fight against Kurdish rebels, Justice Minister Cemil Cicek said in an interview with a local daily, published Thursday (21 July). 
"The preparations are in the final stage," the AFP quoted the minister as telling the Turkish daily Vatan, adding that the government would submit the draft to parliament as soon as lawmakers reconvene on 1 October following their summer recess. 
The announcement comes in the wake of a series of recent attacks in Turkey. The violence has been largely blamed on the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), blacklisted as a terrorist group by both the United States and the EU. 
A 15-year conflict between PKK-led militants, fighting for Kurdish self-rule in Turkey's southeast, and government forces ended in 1999 after the capture of the group's commander, Abdullah Ocalan. The conflict, which left some 37,000 people dead, was followed by a period of relative calm. But in June of last year, the PKK called off a five-year unilateral ceasefire. There has been an increase in anti-government and terrorist attacks ever since. 
The latest incident occurred Thursday, when a Turkish soldier and two rebels were killed in a clash in the predominantly Kurdish province of Van. The gun battle began when suspected PKK members, using sniper rifles, opened fire on a group of troops patrolling the area on Turkey's border with Iran. A second Turkish soldier was wounded. 
The shootout followed terrorist attacks earlier this month in two Aegean Sea resorts. A bomb explosion in a central square in the town of Cesme on 10 July injured 20 people. Six days later, five tourists were killed and 13 wounded in the town of Kusadasi when a bomb tore the roof off a minibus. Both attacks have been blamed on the PKK and associated groups. 
At least 105 soldiers and 37 civilians have died in PKK-related violence over the past year, the AFP reported, quoting army figures released Tuesday. The statistics did not include the number of PKK members killed in incidents during that period. 
According to Cicek, the amendments to the anti-terrorism law would not curtail individual freedoms and human rights introduced in recent years, in line with EU standards and norms. 
Following the March 2004 attacks in Madrid and the recent bombings in London, the EU countries are also reviewing their anti-terrorism laws, the minister said. 
"We are examining the new measures taken up in Spain and Britain in the wake of the al-Qaeda attacks there," Cicek told Vatan. "We will also introduce some measures in that framework." 
Returning from visits to Russia and Mongolia, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan pledged that his government would take the necessary measures to prevent further terrorist attacks in Turkey. 
"We'll hold meetings of the cabinet and other related bodies to take steps on the issue," said Erdogan. He confirmed plans to establish a government agency to deal specifically with terrorism-related issues. 
