31/12/2007
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 31/12/07 Photos by Tomislav Georgiev 
 Southeast European Times: What is the position of the Republic of Macedonia about the outcome of the Kosovo issue and the possible negative implications on the Region? 
 Zoran Petrov: The Republic of Macedonia is interested in a peaceful resolution to the Kosovo issue. Not only from the viewpoint of our own security, but also in terms of the fundamental principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of the neighbours, we consider that whatever the solution, and no matter the manner in which it will be adopted, and regardless of the forums under which the solution will be implemented, the solution must be realised peacefully. As an immediate neighbor to Kosovo, with more than 20% of our citizens being of Albanian ethnic origin, it is quite expected that we would be greatly interested in a peaceful solution. 
In simpler terms, we do not wish to interfere, but if necessary, we will provide our assistance. After all, we proved our readiness to help in 1999 when at the peak of the Kosovo crisis, my country received about 300,000 refugees from the province. On the other hand, it must be taken into consideration that the Republic of Macedonia is an immediate neighbour to the Republic of Serbia, as well, with which we have exceptionally good economic relations. In such a situation, practically one does not have so many options. We have to rely on the "constructiveness" factor and to invest maximum efforts in order that through our internal stability we positively reflect on peace in the region. Our country has continually supported the efforts of the international community in the Kosovo status resolution process. We have supported the Ahtisaari plan, which is now again being taken into consideration, believing it to be a good basis for a solution. It is of great importance for us that the ultimate solution serves the purpose of regional stability and does not threaten our achievements thus far. 
In regards to the Kosovo status outcome, it is evident that Kosovo will have a certain form of independence supervised by the EU, which is to take over the KFOR mandate. Furthermore, it is also evident that owing to the opposition by Russia at the UN Security Council, this procedure will be conducted outside the UN. 
There is uncertainty regarding other aspects. First, whether the formal act of declaring independence of Kosovo which is expected in February or March next year will be unanimously supported by the United States, and the EU and NATO members, or whether their positions will be divided. Secondly, whether the proclamation of independence by Kosovo is of such impact that it would cause partition of the northern part of Kosovo with a majority Serb population, in turn triggering a chain reaction in other parts of the Balkans. These are the substantial dilemmas, which are the cause for serious concerns in the region and beyond. I personally consider that many aspects of the possible negative developments would be eliminated if Macedonia, Albania and Croatia get an invitation for NATO membership next April, at the Bucharest NATO Summit. 
 SETimes: What is your assessment of the perspectives of the Republic of Macedonia for NATO membership? 
 Petrov: I consider them to be very realistic. Very realistic. The two key elements for the adoption of a decision by NATO to send invitations for membership will be the Progress Report and the Meeting of the NATO North-Atlantic Council (NAC) with the Republic of Macedonia on January 23rd 2008, when there will be an evaluation of the achievements so far and when the IX Membership Action Plan will be closed officially. The decision-making process by individual NATO member-states will be in February and March 2008. Taking into account the threats by Greece to veto the membership of the Republic of Macedonia in NATO, it is not excluded that the final decision on the invitation could be adopted immediately prior to the start of the Bucharest Summit. 
On September 20th, at the NATO Headquarters in Brussels, during the regular annual meeting between Macedonian representatives and NATO's Senior Political Committee, the text of the 2007-2008 Annual National Programme for NATO Membership of the Republic of Macedonia was considered and adopted. The general impressions regarding the Macedonian case-file were positive. Advancement and intensification of the political dialogue, completing the implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement, then closing the set of issues regarding the judicial system reforms and similar matters are issues the government of the Republic of Macedonia is intensively working on and finalising. 
 SETimes: Does the Republic of Macedonia participate in international peace missions? 
 Petrov: Yes. Despite the fact that we are not a NATO member, we have deployed 240 troops in international operations. We have sent troops in support of the ISAF Mission in Afghanistan, the Freedom for Iraq Mission, ALTHEA mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and UNIFIL mission in Lebanon. Furthermore, in June 2007, the Republic of Macedonia took over the competences of the NATO Headquarters in Skopje, as an important contribution to the peace in the Balkans. Hence, we are currently providing the greatest part of the logistical support for the KFOR Mission in Kosovo. 
 SETimes: How would you define the foreign- policy priorities of Macedonia? 
 Petrov: I have already mentioned some of them. Thus, the membership of the Alliance is one of the priorities. I would underline that NATO membership for us means long-term stability and security not only in the Balkans, but also beyond, signifying also the start of the finalization of the idea for free Europe. Another priority of ours is accession to the EU. At our current stage in the EU integration process -- i.e., EU having the membership candidate status -- we are intensifying activities to fulfil the criteria necessary to get a date for start of accession negotiations. Other foreign policy priorities of the Republic of Macedonia include continuing the strategic partnership with the United States; then developing partnership relations with the EU and NATO member-states, as well as with the Russian Federation and China; promoting good-neighbourliness and developing close relations of trust and co-operation with the countries in our immediate neighborhood; continuation of the hitherto practice of active participation in the work of all major international organisations; pursuing an active foreign-economic policy; promotion of the national, cultural and spiritual identity outside the borders of Macedonia and care for the position of the Macedonian national minority in other countries. 
 SETimes: As you mentioned, there have been suggestions that Greece could veto your application for NATO membership because of the name dispute. Will this problem be resolved? 
 Petrov: It probably will be resolved, but how I would not know. The problem is that there is no realistic problem. In fact, there are no logical elements that could amount to a problem. This is why: we are born as individuals, but at the same time as part of a collective, either in ethnic, national or other terms. Thus, upon my birth, even before I got my personal individual name, I got the name of my collective. To prohibit a person to consider himself or herself as a Macedonian is the same as to prohibit the birth of that person. To change the name of my country is the same as to change the most intimate sense of belonging to a nation, the name of which is identical to the name of the country. This is an inherent right. This is not regulated by any law or international legal act. Nature has its laws and we people with our transient existence, with our existence as individuals and/or a collective, as entities, are part of these natural laws. Hence, my inherent right to be named Zoran is fully immanent to my collective or inherited right to consider myself as a Macedonian. Would you call this problematic? 
However, our southern neighbour decided to pursue the path of denying the name of my country and of my nation and attach this issue the level of national priority No. 1. How far they will go we will see at the Bucharest NATO Summit. If the Republic of Macedonia does not become a NATO member only because of its name, then at least we will have a clear situation that the arguments of force have won over arguments of reason. 
