26/06/2006
(FT - 26/06/06; FENA - 25/06/06; Reuters, DPA, BBC, VOA, AKI, OHR - 23/06/06)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has made enough progress for the Office of the High Representative (OHR) to close on 30 June 2007, the top international envoy in the country said on Friday (23 June). 
The nature of the international community's involvement "must change as the country moves from peace implementation to Euro-Atlantic integration," High Representative Christian Schwarz-Schilling said. 
While the date of the closure is expected to be confirmed in February, after a final review of the situation in the country and the region, preparations for ending the UN-mandated mission are to start immediately. 
The OHR was established some 11 years ago as the chief implementing agency of the civilian aspects of the Dayton Peace Agreement (DPA), which ended the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH. 
The decision on its upcoming closure was announced after a two-day meeting of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC), a body comprising representatives of more than 50 countries and international organisations that oversees the peace process in BiH. The move was "in the interest of all for BiH to take full responsibility for its own affairs," the PIC said in a statement on Friday. 
After the closure of the OHR, Schwarz-Schilling, who assumed his post in February as the fifth and possibly the last international administrator in BiH, will continue as the EU special representative in the country. It is not yet clear whether he will retain his current overarching powers, including the power to fire officials and impose laws. 
 In an interview published in Sunday's Dnevni Avaz, one of Schwarz-Schilling's predecessors in the post said the follow-up office of EU special representative should retain certain powers aimed at guaranteeing constitutional and political order. 
 "BiH is still a fragile state," said Wolfgang Petritsch, adding that BiH is still divided along ethnic lines. It will require at least one more change of politicians' generations before that situation changes, he said. 
The PIC statement Friday warned that the international community "would not tolerate any attempts to undermine the Dayton Peace Agreement -- before or after 30 June 2007". BiH, they said, is a "recognised sovereign state whose territorial integrity is guaranteed" by the 1995 accords. 
Voicing support for the country's aspirations to complete its talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU by the end of 2006, the board also called for the fulfillment of the requirements for the successful conclusion of the negotiations, including full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague. 
