16/01/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 16/01/06
Boosting the climate for trade, and fostering regional co-operation on the road to EU integration were among the key issues tackled by the Stability Pact during 2005, as it pressed ahead with its mission of developing long-term strategies for addressing problems in the region and preventing conflict, according to the initiative's annual report for 2005. 
Last year was a significant turning point for the Stability Pact, the report says. Chief among the developments was the launching of a "regional ownership" process meant to strengthen the participation of Southeast European (SEE) governments in Pact initiatives. 
The issue topped the agenda at the Pact's spring Working Table-Regional Meeting, held in Sofia in May. All key donor governments, beneficiary countries and international organisations participated in a "lively debate" on the move towards regional ownership, according to the report. While urging SEE to increase their political and financial commitment, participants also stressed that donors should not pull out of the region prematurely. 
SEE governments must make concrete resource commitments to the process, Stability Pact Special Co-ordinator Erhard Busek said, as over the long term they will be expected to assume "regional leadership" when it comes to formulating priorities and the management of initiatives. As a step in that direction, Busek has also been working to encourage the South Eastern European Co-operation Process (SEECP) to take on more operational responsibility. 
Enhancing the climate for trade and investment through better regulatory policies -- an issue of vital importance to the region -- was the focus of a Pact seminar hosted in Budapest during November. The event, which took within the framework of the Regional Governance Initiative launched by the Stability Pact together with the OECD, addressed some of the problems Balkan countries continue to experience in this area. These include regulatory barriers that impede cross-border trade, excessive "red tape", poor co-ordination between local, national and regional authorities, high transaction costs, the risk of corruption, and the need to implement reforms and build capacity. 
At the seminar, OECD representatives presented research and analysis on the impact of domestic regulations on the international competitiveness of economies. Participants discussed experiences with regulatory barriers in the SEE region, strategies for overcoming those barriers, and efforts by SEE countries to implement reforms as part of their bid to join the global marketplace. 
The Pact was involved in a number of other important breakthroughs during 2005, including the adoption of a proposal to establish a single free trade zone -- to replace the current network of free trade agreements -- and the signing of an Energy Treaty that will clear the way for a common energy market. In the security arena, an especially significant development was the transfer of nearly all borders in the five Ohrid countries from military to civilian control. 
 Keeping the spotlight on the EU's engagement in the Balkans has been especially important given the bloc's strains over constitutional and enlargement issues, the report noted. While working closely with Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn to keep the momentum going, the Pact also used its influence to press for needed reforms among candidate and potential candidate countries. 
As the process of resolving Kosovo's status got under way in late 2005, the Stability Pact Office worked with UNMIK and the Kosovo provisional institutions to help integrate the province into regional processes, in line with UN Resolution 1244. A senior Stability Pact delegation visited Kosovo in early May to meet UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen and the provisional authorities, and to discuss how the benefits of participation in Stability Pact initiatives could be further increased. 
At the same time, the Pact also pushed for extending the European Civil Aviation Area Agreement to the Balkans -- a particularly important issue for Kosovo, where airspace remains closed. 
The Stability Pact dates back to June 1999, when more than 40 partner countries and international organisations committed themselves to strengthen SEE countries as part of the effort to "foster peace, democracy, respect for human rights and economic prosperity in order to achieve stability in the whole region". 
 The EU member states, the United States, Canada, Japan, Norway, Russia, Switzerland and Turkey are among the Pact partners, as are the countries of the SEE region, international organisations such as the UN and NATO, key financial institutions such as the World Bank, IMF and EBRD, and regional initiatives such as the SEECP. 
 The Pact is divided into three working tables -- on democracy and human rights, economic reconstruction and development, and security issues and the fight against organised crime. In 2002, it set out six "core objectives": promoting local democracy and cross-border co-operation; supporting co-operation among regional parliaments and building legislative capacity; encouraging a regional approach to developing energy, transport, telecommunications and other infrastructure; enhancing the trade and investment climate; supporting the fight against organised crime; and promoting the management and stabilisation of population movements. 
