07/06/2004
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 07/06/04
Ever since the EU Council of Ministers put Macedonia's application for EU membership into procedure, a national strategy on EU integration has been a top priority of the government. To ensure a wider consensus for its approval, the proposal will pass through the Parliamentary Commission on EU Affairs, to incorporate suggestions before a final version is adopted.
"We want to enter deeper the Copenhagen criteria and find some modes on a number of issues," says Dragan Tilev, the head of the government's European integration section. "The strategy will include every segment in the country, including a set of political issues; the economic and social part and all its aspects; issues on approximating legislation and its pace; justice and interior affairs; reform of judiciary; and finally, it ends with implementation mechanisms."
To support the strategy, the government has already presented a national programme for adjusting legislation. "This [programme] encompasses all laws and sub-law acts that should be adopted in 2004," Tilev said. "It is important that we have mechanisms to follow the implementation of the programme through monthly and quarterly reports which we share with the European Commission to keep them informed."
According to Tilev, the main emphasis this year is on judicial reform. "The ministry of justice has already presented a comprehensive strategy on the judiciary, [which] will work on improving the performance of the system from the Supreme Court to the Court of Appeal to courts of first instance. We are also developing programmes for the training of judges," he said.
Reforming the police is another important part of meeting the EU criteria, Tilev added, noting that the government has prepared a strategy to accomplish this, along with a border management programme aimed at transferring responsibility from the army to the police. "That will not only [have police] guarding the borders; it will [also have them] involved in inspections -- market, veterinarian, sanitary -- that can prevent not only trafficking, but the entrance of products risky to people's health," he said.
Translating the legislation is an important part of the process, and Tilev believes it is proceeding at a satisfactory pace. "Together with our colleagues in Brussels, we have come to about 80,000 to 85,000 pages that have to be translated. Not all of them, however, should be translated immediately in this period. A good part of legislation is translated in the final phase ahead of the accession into the EU. This includes primary legislation and international contracts that encompass 20,000 to 28,000 pages, which means that what we are translating now is in line with the pace projected," he said.
