25/01/2008
(FT, UPI - 25/01/08; AFP, DPA, Reuters, BBC, Balkan Insight, B92 - 24/01/08; AFP, FT, Balkan Insight - 14/12/07)
EU foreign ministers are expected to endorse a decision on the deployment of a vast law and order mission to Kosovo during a two-day meeting, opening in Brussels on Monday (January 28th). 
At their December summit, the leaders of the 27-nation bloc agreed in principle to send an 1,800-strong force of policemen, magistrates, prosecutors and customs officials to stabilise the province after it proclaims independence from Serbia. But details concerning the deployment of what is set to become the Union's largest civilian crisis management operation were left for the member states' foreign ministers to decide. 
The EU personnel, who will assume police and judicial duties from UNMIK staff, will work in co-operation with KFOR peacekeepers already on the ground. 
As the vast majority of EU member states agree that the bloc needs to move quickly with the deployment, the foreign ministers are widely expected to support a decision to that effect when they gather in Brussels. Even Cyprus -- one of the few EU nations opposed to recognising a unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo -- is not expected to block the measure, the British daily Financial Times said in a report Friday (January 25th). But it is likely to voice its objections, as it has insisted that a decision authorising the quick launch of the EU operation would pre-empt a solution to the Kosovo status issue. 
 Romanian Foreign Minister Adrian Cioroianu, whose country also opposes recognising Kosovo's independence without a UN endorsement, expressed support for the planned EU mission. 
"It is obviously in Romania's interest to have a European mission in the region before Kosovo declares its independence," the minister said on Tuesday, following talks with Serbian counterpart Vuk Jeremic. 
According to the FT's report, the first group of EU law enforcement officers could arrive in Kosovo even before its parliament adopts the long-planned unilateral declaration of independence. 
On Thursday, Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci told reporters that move was "days" rather than weeks away. "We will proclaim independence very soon," he told journalists in Brussels, following talks with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana. 
During his two-day visit, Thaci was reportedly asked that the declaration be delayed until final preparations for the launch of the EU operation have been completed. EU diplomats said they did not expect the province to proclaim independence before late February or early March. 
Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU is another item the bloc's foreign ministers are scheduled to discuss next week. The accord was initialled in November, but has not been finalised due to Belgrade's failure to prove full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. 
Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel, whose country holds the rotating EU presidency, voiced hope Thursday that the accord will be signed "in the coming days" as "a sign of closeness" between Brussels and Belgrade. 
