25/11/2011
By Georgi Mitev Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 25/11/11
This month's IMF Mission to Belgrade, led by Mark Allen, representative for Central and Eastern Europe, performed its first review under the precautionary stand-by arrangement worth 1.2 billion euros, which Serbia negotiated on September 29th. 
So far, so good. The agreement is being honoured and the Serbian banking system is stable. Due to the leadership of the National Bank of Serbia and a good capital base among banks in the pre-crisis period, inflation is dropping while public spending is being kept in check. 
The IMF Mission left Belgrade with assurances that the hole in the Serbian budget will shrink in 2012 to a lower level than the 4.5% of GDP agreed on for this year. And Serbia remains satisfied with a higher approved deficit, which had been capped at 3.9% in negotiations only three months ago. These "approved" 25m euros mean a lot for Serbia's frail economy. 
Thus, in December, Serbia will be able to draw on the first 190m-euro credit line, although National Bank of Serbia (NBS) Vice-Governor Ana Gligorijević says this money will only be spent in the event of domestic economic instability. 
According to NBS analysis, Serbia is currently far from such a situation. Inflation has been dropping since May, falling from its April level of 14.7% to 8.7% in October, compared to the same period year on year. At the Central Bank, they hope that the planned goal for 2011 of 4.5% ± 1.5% will be achieved in the first quarter of 2012. 
The problem is that the inflation rate is still largely dependent on two things: the success of the agricultural harvest, and how much the state will raise the undervalued prices of electricity, gas, utilities, and food staples, which it controls directly or indirectly. 
The current inflationary trend is encouraging. It allowed the NBS to further drop its key policy rate by as much as 225 base points (2.5 percentage points) since the start of the year. 
On the other hand, industrial production gives little reason for optimism. Due to plummeting demand on the world market -- above all in the EU, where Serbia exports the majority of its products -- industry is subject to extreme pressures. Economic growth this year will be capped at 2%, but is expected to drop to 1.5% next year, with forecasts of further possible contraction. 
Vladimir Vučković, editor of the monthly economics bulletin, Macroeconomic Analysis and Trends (MAT), tells SETimes that "imports of raw materials are dropping, and this points to a deepening of the crisis in production. In an optimistic scenario, industry would have a growth of 1%." 
An even bigger cause for concern is the announced shut down of the second blast furnace at US Steel's factory in Smederevo. The first has been idle for half a year. The company is the biggest exporter in Serbia, responsible for around 16.5% of Serbia's total exports in the first nine months of this year. In a country where unemployment is above 22%, this company alone employs 5,300 workers. 
As he left Belgrade, the IMF's Allen raised a central issue: the likelihood of ramped up public spending heading into the parliamentary elections, as politicians work to woo voters. 
The government says it plans to improve the collection of taxes, earn dividends from public enterprises and boost supervision of public procurement. 
If this fails however, further international indebtedness would be virtually impossible. 
"The current 7.25% interest on state Eurobonds is already too expensive for a country where annual GDP growth amounts to 1.5%," Economist Miroslav Prokopijević tells SETimes. "Spain and Italy -- as the next most problematic EU countries beside Greece -- pay interest of 6.6% to 7.1% so it is clear that for Serbia, even the much smaller.interest is not sustainable in the long term." 
