10/08/2007
(The Washington Post, Euobserver, Irish Examiner, Telegraph, Sofia News Agency - 10/08/07; AP, Reuters, DPA, Al Jazeera, AKI, BBC, VOA, RFE/RL - 09/08/07)
The son of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi has admitted that five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor, jailed for years in Libya on charges of deliberately infecting Libyan children with HIV, were tortured by investigators. 
 "Yes, they were tortured by electricity and they were threatened that their family members would be targeted," Saif al-Islam told Qatar-based Al-Jazeera television in an interview, published on the media's website on Thursday (August 9th). 
However, he denied as "merely lies" most of the allegations made by Palestinian doctor Ashraf Alhajouj, who now has Bulgarian citizenship. He and nurses Kristiana Vulcheva, Nasya Nenova, Snezhana Dimitrova, Valentina Siropulo and Valya Cherveniashka were released from jail on July 24th, under a deal between the EU and Tripoli, and arrived in Sofia several hours later on board a French presidential jet. 
 Listing numerous methods of torture, Alhajouj told reporters that the six were "treated like animals". The Libyan authorities, he said, attached electrodes to sensitive parts of his body, drugged him, beat him and sent dogs to attack him. 
 "They threatened to rape me and they threatened to rape one of my sisters," Alhajouj was quoted as saying later Thursday. "I am telling the full truth and only the truth," he told AP. 
 Some of the nurses have told reporters that they were beaten by the Libyan officers, who they said repeatedly jumped on their chests. Two of the nurses say they were raped. One, Nenova, tried to commit suicide by gnawing the veins in her wrists. 
All six medics have insisted over the years that the confessions they made following their arrests in February 1999 were extracted by torture. 
 Leading HIV experts have said the 1998 outbreak at a Benghazi children's hospital where the nurses worked was most likely the result of unhygienic conditions and predated their arrival. Nevertheless, Libyan authorities twice sentenced the health workers to death -- in May 2004 and December 2006. 
 Nine Libyan policemen and a doctor accused of torturing them were acquitted in June 2005. The nurses' appeal against their acquittal was rejected due to insufficient evidence. 
Earlier this year, Bulgaria lodged a lawsuit against the Libyan officers who allegedly tortured the medics, and Alhajouj has announced plans to file a complaint with the UN Human Rights Committee. 
Saif al-Islam denied that Libya would face legal action for mistreating the medics. He also confirmed the international HIV experts' findings that some of the children had been infected before the medics arrived in Benghazi. The Libyan court rulings in the case were based on "contradictory reports", he said. 
"There is negligence, there is a disaster that took place, there is a tragedy, but it was not deliberate," said Gaddafi's son, who is viewed as a reformer. 
Although Saif al-Islam stopped short of making an apology for the torture the medics endured, one of the nurses welcomed his public admission. 
 "The fact that a Libyan -- and the son of Qaddafi at that -- has told the truth is very gratifying and I thank him for it," Dimitrova told AP. 
All six medics were pardoned by President Georgi Parvanov minutes after they landed in Sofia. 
