28/09/2004
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 28/09/04
Seeking to attract more foreign investment, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has pledged his government's commitment to ensuring legal security. 
 "The most important priority of the Serbian government is the new constitution, but also a number of systemic laws that are meant to stimulate domestic and foreign investors, along with a reform of the judicial system," Kostunica said in an address to the American Chamber of Commerce (AmCham) in Serbia-Montenegro on 15 September. 
His comments came amid heated debate over plans to amend labour legislation adopted in 2002 by the previous government. Kostunica, then an opposition leader, vowed that his party -- if elected to power -- would change the laws, which were strongly opposed by unions. But investment groups and international financial organisations consider the laws crucial to economic growth. 
On 12 September, the head of the Foreign Investors' Council (FIC) in Serbia, Christoph Greussing, said the announced amendments to the law would have a negative effect on Serbia's further development, as they would diminish the republic's attractiveness to foreign investors. The amendments would not only increase the cost of doing business in Serbia but would also impose restrictions, Greussing said, adding that employers' right are also being reduced. At the same time, the unions say they are not satisfied with the changes the government has proposed. 
However, the government has sought to defuse these concerns. Labour Minister Slobodan Lalovic insists the amendments are in line with European regulations, adding that authorities had consulted representatives of the World Bank, the IMF, AmCham, and foreign investors. 
The revised labour laws cover wages, collective bargaining, severance pay, redundancies, employee rights and financial penalties for employers who violate the law. 
 In his speech to AmCham, Kostunica said changes in the law were necessary, but pledged that they would in no way endanger the position of foreign investors operating in Serbia. He also stressed the advantages of the Serbian market -- a favourable geographic position, a revenue tax rate reduced to 10 per cent, a competitive workforce, and a free trade agreement with the Russian Federation. 
US companies are the leading investors in Serbia. Philip Morris alone has invested 518m euros in the Serbian tobacco industry 
