15/05/2012
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 15/05/12
In what has become a jumbled paradox, a recent court verdict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has overturned part of the country's voting law, saying it violates politicians' privacy. 
According to the voting law, every politician must publish their property holdings at both the beginning and end of their mandate. The property index is then published by the Central Election Commission (CEC of BiH) on its website. 
The law stipulated that the index had to be made transparent, to inform the public. 
However, last week, the court in BiH issued a decision that forbids the CEC from carrying out its legal duty because it publishes personal addresses and signatures of politicians, a violation of the law on personal data protection. 
The controversy now heads to the state parliament -- allowing the politicians themselves to decide. 
''Publishing this information was not introduced by BiH parliament delegates, but through a mandate of the High Representative, who ... enforced the voting law of BiH. The politicians now will be the ones deciding about themselves, by themselves," lawyer Vahid Candzic told SETimes. 
The Personal Data Protection Agency of BiH (PDPA) points out that its goal was not to hide anything from the public -- especially not the salaries of the politicians paid by the state budget -- but that privacy must be respected. 
''Publishing property indexes on a website -- along with the signatures of the politicians and their addresses -- enables various misuses, such as scanning of the signature, robberies, burglaries, blackmailing and so on,'' Petar Kovacevic, PDPA director, said. 
However, CEC of BiH President Branko Petric disagrees. "These facts have, up to now, been used by various media and NGOs ... on the internet. The court says the information can be published by the media, NGOs or individuals, but that the same cannot be done by the state institution whose job is to do so. This is paradoxical." 
Many NGOs say it is not democratic -- and contradicts the purpose of property indexes -- to stem the publication. 
''Transparency of property is something that is understood for politicians who serve in a public post. They need to explain the origins of the property, in case the voters inquire about it," Adnan Mevic, from Damar Youth NGO, told SETimes. 
''This is just the continuation of the blow on the democratic foundations and rights of citizens. It is obvious that this case protects the interest of the political class -- to which judges and those employed in agencies belong,'' Miomir Dejanovic, president of the NGO Centre for Humane Politics, told SETimes. 
Many citizens say the court verdict will lead to political corruption. 
''The politicians are going to rob us now, without us even knowing about it,'' Edin Hamzic of Sarajevo told SETimes. 
''Poverty is an unknown term among politicians in BiH -- although they always complain about their salaries not being proportional to the amount of responsibilities they have. We have a right to know how they afford all that luxury while their voters starve,'' Amila Kasumovic, from Vitez, said. 
