08/06/2010
By Marko Biocina for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 08/06/10
Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor scored a political victory Sunday (June 6th) as voters narrowly approved a plan to resolve border issues with Croatia via binding international arbitration. 
The plan promises to end years of quarreling over the Adriatic Sea coastline and open the door to warmer relations between Slovenia and Croatia. Pahor and his Croatian counterpart, Jadranka Kosor, are strong proponents of the deal. 
Turnout in the referendum, at 42.28%, was low. With more than 99% of the votes counted, results showed 51.48% favouring the arbitration agreement and 48.52% opposing it. 
Pahor didn't hide his satisfaction at the outcome. "Although there are no winners or losers today, this referendum is a victory for Slovenia, a Slovenia that is looking to the future, capable of solving its problem in a peaceful way," media reports quoted him as saying. "Slovenia and Croatia have finally proved they can find a way to live in friendship." 
Kosor echoed those sentiments. "Arbitration is the best way to find a solution to a dispute that has been troubling us for nearly 18 years and caused many tensions and frustrations between our two countries," she said. "We want to build new bridges of friendship between Croatia and Slovenia. The Slovenian referendum outcome is an important step in that direction and we welcome it." 
"Croatia now has a clear path toward EU membership," Kosor added. The standoff had threatened to derail Croatia's accession, with Ljubljana blocking negotiations because of the issue. 
 European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso hailed Sunday's results as "an important step forward" and said resolving the border dispute would send an important signal to the region. 
Media in both countries have been almost unanimous in supporting the agreement. The results were a blow, however, to opposition leader Janez Jansa, who had led the "no" campaign. 
Had voters rejected the deal, Pahor's centre-left coalition government might have collapsed. But instead it was Jansa who found himself left out in the cold. 
"We lost by a narrow margin, only a couple of thousand votes," he said. "That's not enough. Issues like this one should be settled by a consensus. We will go down in history as a generation that had the chance to settle our southern border problems in a good way, but failed to do it." 
Others were even more critical. Zvonko Cernac of the Slovenian Democratic Party said "this generation will be remembered as the generation that lost the sea." Another strong opponent of the arbitration deal, Marjan Podobnik, concluded that "Slovenia is no longer a maritime state." 
Critics, including Jansa and his right-wing political partners, still have a role to play in the future of the arbitration deal. After the decision is reached, it must be ratified by both parliaments, and by a two-thirds majority vote. This will be a difficult task in both countries, and especially in Slovenia, since it can't happen without the support of Jansa's Slovenian Democratic Party. 
