18/02/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 18/02/10 
Already this month, Serbian authorities have signed three energy-related contracts of strategic importance. 
On Thursday (February 18th), a 150m-euro loan between the EBRD and Srbijagas was signed. The money will be used to enhance the company's gas pipeline network and construct new underground storage in the village of Itebej in Vojvodina. 
The storage facility will boast a capacity of 1 billion cubic metres for strategic and commercial use. With Srbijagas as the sole operator, the facility will ensure stability in the supply of natural gas and increase regional resilience to potential supply cuts and seasonal consumption changes. 
That deal follows a February 3rd agreement between Serbia's utility company Elektroprivreda Srbije and the China National Machinery and Equipment Corporation (CMEC) on a preliminary contract worth 800m euros for the rebuilding of the Kostolac thermal power plantm 100km southeast of Belgrade. The plant will also be enlarged in a proejct expected to be completed in 2015. 
"The contract on financing of this work should be [final] within the next several months, while the contracts about carrying out the work will be signed in phases," said Energy Minister Petar Skundric. 
Co-operation on the Kostolac plant is the result of a state agreement reached between China and Serbia in Beijing in August 2009. The project envisions the revitalisation of two plant sections of 350MW, construction of another power "block" and increasing the surface digging capacity of the local Drmno strip mine to 12m tonnes of coal per year. 
China's Export-Import Bank will finance 85% of the project at a fixed annual rate of 3% over 15 years; the remaining funds will be provided by the Serbian company. This will be one the biggest investments to date in Serbia's energy sector, Skundric said, increasing the thermal plant's production capacity by at least 450MW. 
Wei Xinghua, the Chinese ambassador to Serbia, said implementation of the project "will be a turning point in relations between China and Serbia", adding that "there is great potential for co-operation between the two countries in the field of energy." 
In the second major energy development, on February 5th, Serbia signed a contract with Russia's Gazprom, creating a joint company that will manage the Serbian natural gas underground storage facility Banatski Dvor. 
The Russians will have a 51% stake in the joint company with the Serbian company Srbijagas holding 49%. Gazprom had purchased the Serbian Oil Industry (NIS) for 400m euros in 2009. With the new contract, Gazprom has strengthened its position in the Serbian energy market. 
The partnership's first job will be to expand Banatski Dvor's capacity to guarantee the stability of both Serbian and regional markets. The goal is to increase the facility's capacity to 470m cubic metres of gas by 2011. 
In winter, daily energy needs in Serbia reach 11 million cubic metres, and up to now, have been met exclusively through exports from Russia. During the 2009 gas crisis following the Russia-Ukraine conflict, Serbia was left without gas, in part because Banatski Dvor could store only small quantities. Serbia is planning to expand its storage capacity to protect it against potential future supply cuts. 
