12/03/2013
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 12/03/13
With access to hundreds of geothermal water sources, Balkan countries can use the alternative power to ease their dependence on gas and electricity, save money and cut fossil fuel usage, researchers said. 
Geothermal water is ground water heated by the earth's energy. By harnessing the physical properties of steam and heat, geothermal water can be used to generate electricity. The main function of geothermal systems is to extract the water from wells, transport it and distribute it to consumers. 
Studies show that geothermal energy is cheaper: homeowners who use geothermal water for heating pay 40 to 80 percent less than gas and electricity users. Geothermal systems are also three to four times more efficient than electric resistance heat. 
The benefits of using geothermal energy, besides the lower cost, include a reduction in fossil fuel energy usage and cuts in operating costs, Todor Kushevski from the Bureau of Research and Development in Kocani, Macedonia, told SETimes. A 145 million-euro, European Commission funded project was recently launched in Kocani to develop of city's geothermal system. 
"The project will provide cheaper and cleaner fuel in comparison with crude oil for the needs of industrial facilities," Kushevski told SETimes. "Geothermal businesses create jobs, foster commercial growth, promote rural development, pay taxes and attract tourists." 
A 2 million-euro investment in Romania's agricultural sector helped to develop geothermal heating systems for greenhouses and created new jobs. 
In Negresti Oas, in Satu Mare County, a sturgeon farm was established using thermal waters. The facility has a capacity of 25 tonnes of starlet, beluga and Russian sturgeon. 
"The thermal waters in western Romania have an energy potential that cannot be neglected. The State Administration is making the efforts to identify, in the European community, the necessary funds for projects dedicated to the use of the energetic potential of thermal waters to heat homes, greenhouses and technological water," Daniel Scradeanu, a professor at the University of Bucharest Faculty of Geology and Geophysics, told SETimes. 
Belgrade lies on underground geothermal waters, and the city produces more than 100 megawatts of thermal power. 
Serbia could produce electricity for most of its needs from geothermal sources, said Ralf Tilo Vajdler, CEO of Geotermon, one of six German companies that visited Serbia last year to scope out investment in the country's geothermal systems. 
"We are very interested in joint ventures with local partners, private investors and through a public-private partnership," Vajdler said. 
According to Wolfgang Bauer, chief executive of the 360plus Konsalt, due to their central position in the Balkans, Serbia and Germany could initiate geothermal projects in neighbouring countries. 
Under the framework of a project that aims to boost the use of renewable geothermal energy in rural areas in Doboj, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Czech Development Agency started research in November 2012. 
Doboj lies in the Pannonian Sea, and according to earlier research, it contains huge amounts of geothermal energy, said Esma Mahmutović, the Doboj assembly president, told SETimes. 
"Cheap geothermal energy could heat schools, hospitals and health centers, which would decrease the costs of their maintenance," Mahmutović said. 
Bulgaria uses about 30 percent of its geothermal resources. Geothermal energy is used mainly in balneology, space heating and cooling and greenhouses. 
In September 2011, Japanese company Aquafarm signed an agreement with Bulgaria's southwestern town of Sapareva Banya to build a geothermal power plant there, which is due to be completed next year. 
Located less than an hour's drive from Sofia, the town is known as the place with the hottest mineral water in all of Europe (103°C) and home of the only active geyser in the Balkans. 
Correspondents Ana Lovaković in Sarajevo, Biljana Pekusic in Belgrade, Gabriel Petrescu in Bucharest and Svetla Dimitrova in Sofia contributed to this report. 
