08/11/2006
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 08/11/06
This month, Croatia's current arrangement with the IMF comes to a close. With all of the goals met under the stand by arrangement, the country has decided to begin handling its economic, fiscal and monetary policy independently. Prime Minister Ivo Sanader announced the decision last month, saying that the new policy confirms the country's economic maturity and demonstrates that the European Commission backs the IMF opinion. 
In 2004, the IMF Executive Board approved a 20-month stand-by arrangement to the tune of 120m million euros to support Croatia's economic programme. 
The IMF said then that Croatia's economic growth and inflation performance since the mid-1990s was comparable to Central and Eastern European countries. But the positive performance was marred by the worsening of Croatia's external current account deficit and rising external debt. 
These trends -- which have accelerated since 2000 -- made Croatia vulnerable to external shocks. Authorities recognised this and called on the IMF to assist in designing a set of policies for fiscal consolidation and supporting structural measures. 
The 2004 arrangement focused on two major issues: the high national deficit and rampant external debt. The deficit is at 3% this year, down from 6.3% in 2003. External debt has been cut by 911m euros over the past two and a half years, and has slowed in growth -- to 12% this year, down from 36% in 2003. 
In light of these trends, Zagreb now wants to try to boost economic performance on its own, relying on the Fund's occasional advice, but not on concrete and practical financial arrangements. 
Starting this month, when the current stand by arrangement with the IMF is complete, Croatia will not sign a new one. From now on, the Fund will serve as advisers, not as creditors. IMF representatives will visit Croatia once a year to review the actions and policies of the government. 
The IMF has said it welcomes the country's readiness to take charge of its economy, praising Croatia for the results achieved since 2004. 
According to the Fund, continuation of privatisation and restructuring of the shipbuilding industry are two vital areas requiring attention. Sanader agreed that these areas remain the highest priorities. 
