10/04/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 10/04/09
Moldovan-Romanian relations have been marked by tensions in recent years. While Romania has expressed support for Moldova's EU ambitions, the Moldovan government accuses Romania of scheming to unify with Moldova. After the recent street protests in Chisinau, President Vladimir Voronin promptly accused Romania of interference in internal affairs. 
The bilateral tensions boiled over after Moldova's April 5th parliamentary elections. Over 30,000 mostly youthful protesters contested the election results showing a narrow communist victory even though pre-election polling had put communist support at 36%. The demonstrators set fire to the parliament building and presidential office. 
 During a meeting with representatives of civil society on Wednesday (April 8th), Voronin said his "patience had run out". Moldova has "decided to introduce a visa regime for Romania. Moreover, the Romanian ambassador has been declared persona non grata, he said. Ambassador Filip Teodorescu received an order on Wednesday to leave the country in 24 hours. 
Voronin told EU special representative Kalman Mizsei that Teodorescu is a general in Romanian intelligence and had personal involvement in the Chisinau protests. 
Foreign Minister Andrei Stratan warned Bucharest that beginning on Wednesday, all Romanian citizens must have a visa to enter Moldova. Moldovan border police informed their Romanian counterparts they had closed the border checkpoints. They prevented a group of 19 journalists from entering Moldovan territory on Wednesday, saying they lacked visas. Reporters without Borders and the Committee to Protect the Journalists denounced the measure as "unfair". 
 The Romanian Foreign Ministry (MAE) issued a press release "categorically [rejecting] the accusations ... It is unacceptable that the communist government in Chisinau transfers responsibility for its internal problems to Romania and Romanian citizens," it said. MAE also notified citizens travelling to Moldova of the visa requirement. In addition, Foreign Minister Cristian Diaconescu asked the Moldovan authorities to provide the exact number of Romanian citizens arrested in recent days. 
 Romania's Defence Superior Council (CSAT), chaired by President Traian Basescu, convened on Wednesday evening to analyse the situation in Moldova. Basescu announced the next day he would address parliament on April 14th. Meanwhile, the parliamentary foreign affairs committees agreed to appoint Mihnea Constantinescu as a new ambassador to Moldova. 
The EU asked authorities in Chisinau to restore relations with Romania, according to a press release issued by the French, Czech and Swedish foreign ministers, representing the countries that have recently held or will hold the EU presidency. Moldova should respect "all constitutional liberties", the press release said. 
