08/08/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 08/08/05
As part of the National Programme on Prevention and Repression of Corruption, the Macedonian Justice Ministry has drafted a new law aimed at preventing conflicts of interest among civil servants and high-level officials. Macedonia is the only country in the SEE region that does not have such a law, which is widely considered important for Skopje's bid to join the EU. 
"In the past 15 years, we have seen individual, family and party interests regularly taking precedence over public ones," said Transparency International's Macedonia director, Zoran Jacev. "Hence, political liability of high-level officials is of great importance. It is a much severer punishment when a politician is brought up for discussion and dismissed than when he pays a fine." 
Under the draft legislation, officials found to be protecting their private interests while neglecting public duties may be dismissed from office, and their names made public. The law will also regulate receipt of gifts. In the future, officials will be only allowed to receive books, souvenirs and similar items below a certain value to be determined by law. They will not be allowed to receive money regardless of its amount. 
Any official found in a conflict-of-interest situation must declare it and be excluded from the procedure in question. Moreover, such a declaration can be made by others who become aware of an official's conflict of interest. A special commission will decide on whether there is a conflict in a particular case, and will be responsible for informing the public about such cases, although safeguards will also be established to protect the personal data of the officials involved. 
One of the conclusions of a recent conference on implementing the national anti-corruption programme is that a strong law regulating conflict of interest is needed. Other recommended steps include limiting the discretionary rights of ministers and introducing needed reforms into the public administration system. 
Waging an effective fight against corruption is also a key requirement for harmonisation with the EU. As it seeks to gain membership, Macedonia must bring its existing legislation into line with the Union's standards, and Brussels has made it clear that transparency of government is a major criterion. 
