23/12/2004
By Antonela Krstovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica - 23/12/04
Last month's meeting of the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative (AII) drew 200 participants. At the two-day conference in Przno, Montenegro, they discussed issues related to ecology, economics, transport, tourism, culture, education and the fight against organised crime. 
The AII aims to build ties among Adriatic and Ionian coastal countries, to achieve political and economic stability in the region through co-operation in solving specific problems. Seven countries -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Greece, Italy, Slovenia and Serbia-Montenegro -- are part of the AII, which is being chaired by Montenegro until May 2005. The one-year presidency has provided Podgorica with substantial opportunities for the presentation, promotion and introduction of projects aimed at fostering regional co-operation. 
The initiative's activities are divided among separate Round Tables. At the Montenegro conference, the Round Table of Economy, Tourism and Co-operation between Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs) discussed increasing the support environment for SMEs in Slovenia, the Italian instrument for financing bilateral and multilateral programmes in non-EU AII countries, and other topics. The Tourism Sub-Table featured presentations on the Italian-Montenegrin Academy of Tourism, the Greek education and training system in the field of tourism, human resources development in the Slovenian tourism industry, and boosting services and trade in the Mediterranean Basin and the Balkans. Closing presentations focused on integrated coastal zone management and the development of nautical tourism in Montenegro. 
The initiative's other Round Tables cover transport and shipping co-operation, culture, education, environmental protection and sustainable development, and the fight against organised crime. Round Table meetings are held annually in the fall and spring; the next meeting will be held in March. 
 The AII was formally established at the conference on Development and Security of the Adriatic-Ionian Region held in Ancona, Italy, in May 2000. Its decision-making body is the Council of Foreign Ministers (Adriatic-Ionian Council), whose agenda is prepared by periodic meetings of the national co-ordinators. The AII Council consists of the foreign ministers of the member states and an EU representative. 
The one-year presidency rotates each May, in accordance with the alphabetic order of members. Croatia will assume the presidency in May 2005. 
