18/12/2006
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 18/12/06 
Outgoing UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan has warned Security Council members that further delays in Kosovo's status process are dangerous and could bring instability. He appealed to leaders in Pristina and Belgrade to avoid unilateral actions. 
 "Kosovo's ethnic Albanian government and Serbia remain diametrically opposed in their views of the future status of the Serbian province," Annan said at a Security Council meeting Thursday (December 14th). 
He said independence and autonomy are among the options for the province, where Albanians outnumber Serbs and other minorities 9 to 1. A UN proposal regarding the future status, which was to have been submitted this year, has been postponed until after Serbia's parliamentary elections on January 21st. 
 "High expectations on the part of Kosovo Albanians, coupled with recent speculation about a possible delay in the process, have led to a feeling of uncertainty as to the way ahead and are likely to be a source of instability if momentum slows," Annan said in the report. 
 "Fringe groups and extremists on all sides stand ready to exploit more widespread frustration. Uncertainty and frustration also are prevalent among the Serbs and other minority populations," he added. 
Annan noted that only uneven progress has been made in the status talks between Pristina and Belgrade, which began this year under the sponsorship of special envoy Martti Ahtisaari. 
 "Overall, the positions of the parties in each of the areas discussed remain far apart," Annan said. 
 On a positive note, the secretary-general welcomed Kosovo's commitment to the implementation of UN-set standards -- eight targets that include building democratic institutions, enforcing minority rights, creating a functioning economy and setting up an impartial legal system. 
 "Progress will be achieved by demonstrating through actions, not words, that everyone has a future in Kosovo. It will be important that substantive actions take precedence over symbolism with the aim of promoting confidence and stability," he said 
UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker presented his regular three-month report on the province at the meeting, also attended by Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku. Ruecker noted that while the status process has clearly come a long way this year, momentum needs to be maintained and a timely status settlement needs to be achieved. 
 "Resolving Kosovo's status would benefit the entire Balkan region, including Belgrade. On the other hand, further delay would entail significant political and economic costs for Kosovo, for our neighbours, for the region as a whole and for the international community," he said. "Delay will raise tension and play into the hands of extremists on all sides." 
