09/06/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 09/06/11 
For years, the Netherlands has blocked Serbia's EU accession process because of the country's failure to arrest Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb general whose troops carried out the Srebrenica massacre. Now Mladic is in custody at The Hague, having been arrested and extradited by Serbian authorities in late May. But a decision by the Dutch parliament on Wednesday (June 8th) suggests Serbia may still have some waiting to do. 
 The MPs turned down a proposal to ratify Serbia's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU, indicating they will wait until ICTY chief prosecutor Serge Brammertz issues an official report on Serbia's co-operation. 
 Henk Jan Ormel, chairman of parliament's Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, said he regretted parliament's decision. "Serbia is an important European country, but prior to joining, it has to show that it follows the core values of the EU," he told Serbian state TV RTS. 
"Brammertz will present his report to the EU, and since the UN Security Council has already given a positive assessment of the most recent event, I believe that the Netherlands and its parliament must follow that logic," Ormel said 
 Deputy Prime Minister Maxime Verhagen said Serbia should be regarded as a "normal country, with normal conditions for EU membership". 
 "I am convinced that, during the debate on SAA at the Dutch parliament, Serbia will be treated as such by the majority of MPs," he added. 
While authorities in Belgrade have downplayed the Dutch parliament's decision, some analysts say it could fuel euroscepticism in Serbia and create trouble for the ruling coalition, which is grounding its 2012 election campaign on European integration. 
Speaking on national TV, President Boris Tadic said Serbs should not be discouraged. "We should fulfill our obligations and in the end everything will surely be all right. That takes work, because there are no promises and gifts," Tadic said. 
Serbian government spokesman Milivoje Mihajlovic told SETimes he had no doubt the Dutch parliament would soon launch the ratification of SAA after it formally receives the text of Brammertz's report to the UN Security Council. "We will continue implementing reforms and we hope we will obtain EU membership candidate status and a date for the beginning of accession talks by this fall," he said. 
 However, Belgrade Faculty of Political Sciences professor and former Serbian ambassador to France Predrag Simic told SETimes that the decision made by the Netherlands could shake up the position of the pro-European forces in Serbia and affect public opinion regarding integration. 
"If the morning shows the day, Belgrade will not get from the EU what it had expected after the extradition of Mladic to The Hague on May 31st -- the acceleration of European integration," Simic said. 
"Placing additional conditions on Belgrade would now present the process of association with the EU to the citizens as a relationship in which Serbia is being handed endless lists of conditions. That will certainly fuel Euroscepticism in the state, and the pro-European forces may be punished in the election," he added. "We have done what we said we would do; will the EU do the same now?" 
Marko Blagojevic of the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy says he doubts the government will face negative consequences among voters because of Mladic's extradition, as long as they see that it clears away barriers to accession. 
"However, if the citizens do not feel any benefits in accelerated European integration after the extradition, something that will affect their standard of living or at least the prospect of it, it is quite possible they will punish the ruling coalition in next year's election," Blagojevic said. 
