14/04/2010
By Svetla Dimitrova in Sofia, Baris Yilmaz in Istanbul, Bojana Milovanovic in Belgrade, HK Tzanis in Athens, Nedjeljko Rudovic in Podgorica, Sami Neza in Tirana, Natasa Radic in Zagreb and Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest for Southeast European Times -- 14/04/10
Polish President Lech Kaczynski's death on Saturday (April 10th) brought tears to the eyes of Southeast Europeans. Many states in the region have close ties with Poland, most with sizable Polish communities within their borders. 
 Kaczynski was on his way to Russia to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the Katyn massacre near Smolensk when his plane crashed. The president, his wife and 94 others -- including Polish statesmen, top military officials, politicians, religious leaders and crew members -- were killed. 
The Polish entourage was headed to a ceremony to put to rest one tragedy -- the 1940 massacre of more than 20,000 Polish military officers by the Soviet secret police -- and instead became another. 
 "Let's allow the Katyn wound to finally heal," Kaczynski had planned to say in his speech. "We are already on the path; we should follow it to bring our nations closer and not stop or retreat." 
 His death left those words unuttered and led to an outpouring of grief from every country in the Balkans. 
 On Saturday afternoon, people in Zagreb began going to the residential area of Tuskanac, leaving candles and roses in front of the Polish Embassy along Krlezin Gvozd. 
 "I just wanted to let them know we are with them in these moments. It is so sad," said Marta, who came to leave a rose to honour the late president and his wife. 
Gordana Trajceska told SETimes that she mourned by attending a special mass at Skopje's Catholic Church on Sunday. "Macedonians share in the pain of the Polish people because they feel especially close to Poland," Trajceska said. 
"It is a tragedy. I don't have words to express the pain that I am feeling right now," said Ghervazen Longher, president of the Polish community in Romania and its representative in the Romanian parliament. 
 "A tremendous shock," a spokeswoman for the Polish Embassy in Athens told SETimes. "This is a great loss for Poland and for us Poles -- our president and so many high-ranking Polish representatives were lost in a brief moment; this is very tragic." 
It was especially sad, the spokeswoman said, because it occurred during the commemoration of the Katyn massacre. 
In the Greek capital, a hurriedly organised memorial service at a Catholic church in the Polish community attracted more than 1,000 mourners. The service was attended by Michal Klinger, the Polish ambassador to Greece, along with embassy staff and numerous members of the local Polish community. 
Anna Dudko, who is half Polish, was among dozens attending a service at the Cathedral of St. Joseph in Sofia. Dudko said all of her Bulgarian relatives had called to express condolences for "this terrible irony of fate". 
 All of the region's leaders expressed their condolences. Bulgaria will be represented at Sunday's funeral by President Georgi Parvanov. Sympathies were expressed also by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Serbian President Boris Tadic, Albanian President Bamir Topi and Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski. 
"Today is not a mourning day only for the great Polish nation, but for all the friends of Poland in the world," said Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha. 
Croatian President Ivo Josipovic said he and his country had "lost a friend. Lech Kaczynski was a true friend of our country". 
The Polish president and his wife were in Zagreb in February to attend Josipovic's inauguration. 
On Tuesday, the Serbian government announced it is declaring Thursday a day of mourning. Crowds have also been signing a book of condolences at the Polish Embassy in Belgrade. 
Podgorica resident Dejan Perunicic said he hopes the tragedy marks the end of the long list of Katyn victims. 
"Katyn forest again was fatal for the Polish," said Perunicic. "I hope this is the end of the circle and that this tragedy will reconcile the two nations." 
