18/06/2004
(AP, Reuters, Office of the High Representative, FENA, Tanjug - 17/06/04; Reuters - 16/06/04)
Urging Radovan Karadzic to turn himself in, a senior Bosnian Serb official is warning of negative consequences for Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) Serb-run entity, Republika Srpska (RS), if it fails to hand over the fugitive.
In an interview with the Sarajevo-based daily Dnevni Avaz published Thursday (17 June), RS Parliament Speaker and Serb Democratic Party (SDS) leader Dragan Kalinic said the entity risks "the gravest sanctions and isolation so far" unless Karadzic surrenders or is arrested.
The SDS, which Karadzic founded, has attempted to distance itself from the former Bosnian Serb leader in recent years, and has expelled him from its ranks. Kalinic, who served as health minister during the 1992-1995 conflict in BiH, says he has not seen Karadzic since 1996 or 1997.
In 1995, the UN tribunal indicted Karadzic and Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic for their alleged roles in atrocities during the war. Both have been charged with genocide. Karadzic has been on the run since 1996 and is believed to be hiding in eastern BiH and in Montenegro.
Recently, Bosnian Serb police made their first serious attempt to catch the fugitive, but without success. RS is the only former Yugoslav territory that has not yet arrested a single war crimes suspect.
BiH was hoping to get an invitation to join NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme during the Alliance's two-day summit in Istanbul on 28 June. But NATO officials have said that an invitation is unlikely until RS demonstrates its co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
"I have to say that there is a feeling of progress in RS when it comes to the co-operation with ICTY," Kalinic told Dnevni Avaz. "There is a readiness of the institutions to meet that obligation in every aspect and therefore I believe that rejection from Istanbul would cause negative consequences."
But Paddy Ashdown, the top international envoy in BiH, says the time for action was running out.
"Only one condition remains to be fulfilled. We have to show full co-operation," Ashdown said Thursday. "The clock is ticking. We have 10 days."
Commenting on the possible consequences of non-admission to the PfP programme, BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic said it would probably result in political upheaval and the resignation of RS ministers.
In remarks also published in Dnevni Avaz on Thursday, Terzic suggested that one of the measures Ashdown could take in the aftermath of a rejection would be to restructure the police "for (the) state to gain, and entities to lose part of (their) authority in that field".
