05/04/2007
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 05/04/07 
Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu's new cabinet received presidential approval on Wednesday (April 4th), one day after being endorsed by Parliament. In a televised broadcast to the nation, however, President Traian Basescu said he doubted the new government's "legitimacy". 
The reshuffled cabinet, which includes members of Tariceanu's National Liberal Party (PNL) and the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Romania (UDMR), has the firm backing of only around 20% of the parliamentary deputies, Basescu said. To win approval in Parliament, it required support from the main opposition Social Democratic Party (PSD). 
Such a "political game" is dangerous for Romanian democracy, Basescu said. 
Tariceanu's PNL has 73 MPs in the 469-seat Parliament, while the UMDR has 32. The PSD, by contrast, has 150. 
The government reshuffle was the culmination of a protracted quarrel between the PNL and its former coalition partner, Basescu's Democratic Party (PD). The president and prime minister have also been locked in a bitter personal feud, trading allegations of corruption. 
Basescu strongly opposed Tariceanu's call for the withdrawal of Romanian troops from Iraq, as well as his move to postpone EU parliamentary elections. 
To secure the PSD's backing, the prime minister ousted all PD ministers, as well as independent Justice Minister Monica Macovei. She was widely credited with leading a tough anticorruption fight that helped Romania achieve EU membership on schedule. Tudor Chiuariu, a 30-year-old lawyer, replaced her. 
While giving the prime minister the votes he needed, the PSD has not made any public commitments for the longer term. 
"We have chosen the lesser of two evils, a reshuffled government without the Democrats," explained the party's leader, Mircea Geoana. 
Polls show that Basescu remains popular among voters. However, the president's position is now increasingly tenuous, due to an impeachment drive launched by the PSD and the ultra nationalist Greater Romania Party. 
If the PNL now joins the opposition in bringing him down, it will make for a dramatic reversal of the 2004 presidential vote. Then, the Liberal-Democratic alliance gained an unexpected victory and ousted the PSD, propelling Basescu to office in place of the then-Socialist leader, Adrian Nastase. 
