28/07/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 28/07/09
After months of wrangling, Security Minister Tarik Sadovic was fired from his post last week at the insistence of his own Party for Democratic Action (SDA). 
The dismissal came amid allegations that Sadovic obstructed the deportation of Islamic radicals from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
SDA President Sulejman Tihic sent a formal request to BiH Prime Minister Nikola Spiric, who endorsed Sadovic's dismissal on July 22nd. BiH's House of Representatives voted 28-7 to back Spiric's decision. 
During the country's 1992-1995 conflict, several thousand foreign Islamists arrived in BiH to aid the embattled Bosniaks. They operated mostly as members of the El-Mujahid battalion of the BiH' Army's third corps. 
After the conflict, many stayed in BiH, established families by marrying local women and opened private businesses. 
However, their deportation has been an underlying issue in the country's Euro-Atlantic integration. Some have been pronounced a threat to national security, and are detained at the Sarajevo Lukavica district immigration centre. 
In May, the government conducted a comprehensive sting operation in which it arrested Syrian native Aiman Awad aka Abu Ejmen, Tunisian Ammar al Hanchi, Algerian-born Aissa Benkhira and Kuwait native Abdulla Ba-Awra aka Hudeifa. The four were soldiers and commanders of the El-Mujahid unit during the 1990s conflict. 
The operation was led by head of the department for foreign nationals, Dragan Mektic. 
He said it was aimed at dealing with the issue of foreign persons who reside in BiH illegally. "We aim ultimately to remove this baggage associated with BiH. We are just implementing the law," he said. 
Sadovic has been criticised by his own SDA for obstructionism. Following a number of consultations within the party's governing bodies, recently re-elected party leader Tihic asked Sadovic to step down based on "obstruction in passing and implementing the law on residence and movement of foreign nationals and asylum, his ministry working on ethnically-based lines, ignoring the Council of Ministers, and challenging of the EU Police Mission's mandate in the country". 
Tihic also noted "constant complaints from important foreign and local institutions" about Sadovic's poor communication and co-operation. Local media reported that US officials accused Sadovic of failing to take prompt action to expel Islamic extremists believed to have links with al-Qaeda. 
Sadovic initially refused to step down, and accused Tihic of bowing to pressure from Deputy High Representative Raffi Gregorian and US Ambassador to BiH Charles English. 
The SDA is expected to nominate a replacement for Sadovic. Local media reports say the party has tapped two potential candidates -- Senad Sepic, who is currently deputy minister of civil affairs; and Halid Genjac, member of the upper house of parliament. 
