21/04/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 20/04/10
The Belgrade Marathon on Sunday (April 18th) attracted more than 20,000 runners of all ages from more than two dozen countries. The streets of the Serbian capital became one big track for professional runners and amateurs. Taking part were children, the elderly and about 100 disabled people. 
The first seven finishers in the race were from Kenya. The winner was Johnstone Kibet Maiyo, 22, who finished in 2:16:23. 
"The race was difficult, [the weather] was warm, but I was confident enough," said Maiyo afterward. "I knew I was going to win when I reached the 38th kilometer with no problems." 
Maiyo had good things to say about the organisation of the marathon, as did other participants. 
"I am here to spend time with friends and have fun," said 14-year-old Milan Rajic. He told SETimes that he had participated last year and "likes the atmosphere and crowd". 
 Pensioner Zoran Predic, 67, said he was out to "prove that my spirit is still young and that my strength has not failed me yet". 
A pair of Europeans won the half-marathon contest. 
Association for Developmentally Challenged Individuals president Dejan Kozic told SETimes "This is an opportunity for disabled people to be part of something really big … something to make them feel important. They will talk about their participation in the marathon for a long time." 
Dejan Nikolic, director of the marathon, noted the event's global and regional significance. 
"Athletes from 32 countries took part … including runners from all neighbouring countries," he said. "That proves the size and importance of this event." Second place went to Kipkorir Kibet with a time of 2:18:15 while Kibet's fellow Kenyan Paul Lomon Lopio came in third with 2:18:19. 
Hellen Wanjiku Mugo, also from Kenya, won the women's race in 2:41:19. 
"This is the best result I have ever achieved," Mugo said afterward. "It was windy and I had leg cramps at the 35th kilometre ... [but] I'm satisfied with how I ran." 
Volha Rezkaya of Belarus came in second among the women at 2:53:57 while Slovenia's Neza Mravlje finished third at 2:59:30. 
A number of foreign athletes and journalists missed the race because volcanic ash from Iceland grounded flights across the continent. 
Flight problems prompted the promoter of the marathon -- former Polish runner Marian Woronin, 54 -- to travel to Belgrade by automobile. Woronin earned his place among fabled European athletes in Warsaw on June 9th 1984 when he ran 100 meters in a fraction under 10 seconds. 
