24/10/2005
(BNN - 24/10/05; FT, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik, Vseki Den - 23/10/05; BTA, Rompres - 22/10/05; Reuters - 21/10/05)
The European Commission (EC) is due to release a progress report Tuesday (25 October) on Bulgaria and Romania's progress in their accession bids. It is widely expected that the document will warn Bulgaria that it must speed up implementation of required reforms, while confirming that the planned accession date of 1 January 2007 is still feasible. 
Citing sources at the EU, international media reported at the weekend that the EC will note that Romania -- once considered behind Bulgaria in the accession process -- has caught up, while drawn-out political wrangling following elections in Bulgaria led to a slowdown in the pace of reforms. 
Though the vote was held on 25 June, it was not until mid-August that a new government was formed. 
Along with Romania, Bulgaria is scheduled to become a full EU member on 1 January 2007. However, under the accession treaty the two countries signed with the Union in April, their admission into the 25-nation bloc could be delayed by one year if they fail to fulfil their commitments. 
Ahead of the report's release, Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev said he anticipates sharp criticism. 
"We will accept criticism soberly and we will work very hard on the 'to do' list," the Financial Times quoted Stanishev as saying Sunday. "But a postponement would send entirely the wrong signal to the region." 
Tuesday's report is expected to reiterate the need for further measures in the areas of services, corporate law, agriculture, the environment, and justice and home affairs, including border controls. 
"We should not argue what is written in the report but rather accept it and try to compensate in the next few months," Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin said in an interview with Bulgarian national radio. 
After talks Saturday with his Romanian counterpart, Mihai-Razvan Ungureanu, Kalfin stressed that Sofia would make every effort to honour its commitments to the EU. He noted that in recent months, parliament had approved 30 laws related to EU integration, including one linked to judicial reform. 
During their meeting in Romania's eastern town of Iasi, the two foreign ministers agreed on a common action plan aimed at speeding up ratification of their countries' accession treaty by the parliaments of the EU member states. 
"There should be no competition between Romania and Bulgaria because the two countries have a common accession treaty, and the authorities in Bucharest and Sofia should do their utmost for integration in the European Union together," Kalfin told reporters. 
Ungureanu made a similar statement, noting, "Romania and Bulgaria are in the same boat as far as their integration is concerned, and they should row together." 
