24/06/2004
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 24/06/04
NATO's 26 heads of state and government will assemble in Istanbul on Monday (28 June), to discuss partnerships with the EU, the Caucasus and Central Asia, as well as NATO missions in Afghanistan and the Balkans. Turkey has been on alert for two months, taking security measures to thwart any possible threats.
NATO Secretary Jaap de Hoop Scheffer recently paid a visit to Turkey to see the preparations for the summit, which he said would also focus on an enhanced set of measures against terrorism. "The Istanbul summit will likely take further decisions to enhance intelligence sharing, to strengthen [member countries'] response to possible civil emergencies caused by terrorist incidents and to deepen co-operation with non-NATO nations and other organisations."
De Hoop Scheffer stressed that NATO's current engagement in Afghanistan was its number one priority and would be high on the agenda at Istanbul. Pledging that NATO would stay committed politically and militarily to the Balkans, he said the Alliance has achieved a great deal in the region, but that its work there is not over yet.
Developments in Iraq and Middle East stability were also likely to be focal points of the summit, said de Hoop Scheffer. Turkey will give a presentation focused on the creation of a major trade, energy, transportation and information corridor between the Iraqi city of Basra and Bursa, Turkey.
Due to the importance of the event, Turkey has taken the tightest security measures. The police department has cancelled all security personnel leave until after the summit. Some parts of Istanbul will be off limits to the public to ensure the safety of the meetings.
A budget of $20m has been allocated for security measures. Police have almost tripled the number of vehicles to be used for patrols during the meetings; explosives experts are being brought in; and all access points to Istanbul will be heavily monitored. Nerves were rattled Thursday however, when a pair of explosions rocked both Istanbul and Ankara.
