27/04/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 27/04/11
Earlier this month, Turkish security forces launched a large-scale operation on the border with Syria, killing seven Kurdish militants after a large group of Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) crossed the border. The operation came after months of secret negotiations in which Ankara managed to persuade Damascus to sign a security agreement on Kurdish insurgents. 
On April 14th, the two countries approved a counter-insurgency accord that was passed by the Turkish parliament. 
However, as the scale of crackdowns on protests increases in Syria, some in Ankara feel unsure about the future direction of the agreement. 
The chairman of the Turkey-Syria Friendship Group in parliament, Mehmet Sandir, believes co-operation between the two countries against terrorism is in danger. In an interview with SETimes, he outlined his concerns. 
"If Turkey doesn't greet the [crackdown] on protests in Syria harshly and [fails to] explain to the Bashar al-Assad regime who is who -- people in the streets are not terrorists, but the ones who want democracy -- at the end of the day Damascus will point out the wrong people to us, instead of the real terrorists," said Sandir, a representative of the right-wing Nationalist Action Party (MHP). 
"Turkish intelligence and politicians should do their best to prevent the Assad regime from killing innocent people before protesters become more aggressive," he urged, adding that democracy in Syria "is one of our main national interests". 
Sharing a 900km-long border, Syria and Turkey went to the brink of war in 1998 over Syrian support for the PKK. Bilateral relations have gained increased importance under the assertive foreign policy of the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP), with the signing of several agreements in 2009, including visa-free travel. 
Co-operation on the Kurdish issue is also evident. Last year alone, Syrian security forces rounded up 400 suspected PKK members. Although originally a Turkish Kurdish organisation, the PKK counts many Syrian Kurds among its fighting force and leadership. 
Since anti-government protests in Syria began, Ankara has taken a wait and see approach, monitoring developments while trying to leverage its influence to moderate the Syrian response without damaging bilateral ties and concrete interests. 
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has refrained from publicly advocating regime change in Damascus, calling for reforms instead. 
"We are watching the events [in Syria] closely and do our best to influence the country's rulers," Mehmet Ceylan, the AKP deputy chairman of parliament's Foreign Relations Commission, told SETimes. 
Regarding the counterinsurgency agreement, he said the accord has paved the way for the extradition of PKK members between Syria and Turkey. 
Serdar Erdurmaz, vice-chairman of the Turkish Centre for International Relations and Strategic Analysis in Ankara, says the uprising in Syria is a huge setback for Ankara since it has recently managed to achieve normal ties after more than 30 years of rivalry. 
"Today, the fact that the uprising is happening in a country with more than a 1.5 million Kurdish population, is a danger for Turkey," he told SETimes, calling the counter-insurgency pact between the two countries a "dead document". 
"If the Syria uprising leads to the creation of a new administration, then Turkey has to start from the very beginning," he added. 
