03/01/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 03/01/06
A controversy over the state rail company's purchase of used locomotives and rail buses from abroad at steep prices has amplified public concern over corruption in Serbia. The dispute follows recent scandals in the military, the medical system and the courts. 
Earlier this year, Zeleznice Srbije (Serbian Railways) purchased six locomotives from Slovenia and ten rail buses from Sweden. Critics say the state-owned company violated the law by not conducting a competitive procurement procedure. While on paper the company officially considered offers from Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro and Republika Srpska, in reality it had already signed a negotiated contract. 
"Serbian Railways was warned on two occasions that a negotiated tender for the railway buses is against the law, but they chose to ignore us," says Predrag Jovanovic, head of the Public Procurement Directorate. 
Railway officials insist the deal was justified and did not fall under the scope of the procurement law. According to company director Milanko Šarancic, acquiring the equipment was an urgent necessity and there was insufficient time to conduct a public procurement procedure. Furthermore, he argues, the locomotives and rail buses were purchased through leasing contracts, which are not subject to the procurement regulations. 
However, the goal of meeting an urgent need was apparently not achieved. Although the 4m euro rail bus purchase was negotiated in July, the buses did not arrive in Serbia in time for the summer season. 
Capital Investments Minister Velimir Ilic, who also happens to be Sarancic's party chief, has backed the transaction, saying a police inquiry determined it was legal. 
"I don't see how public acquisitions can represent financial risks, and how this can bother someone in the railway services. Everything was done correctly in this deal. The railway company does not have any money, so we worked on trying to get six years to pay off the purchase. These vehicles will be saving us up to 3m euros a year because the diesel locomotives they are replacing were creating great losses for us," Belgrade-based Radio B92 quoted Ilic as saying. 
So far, only one person has been held accountable in the scandal -- Ilic's aide for railway issues, Branislav Boskovic. He was fired after disagreeing strongly with the locomotive purchase and demanding a feasibility study. 
It is not the first time that a railway deal in Serbia has been marred by apparent irregularities. At the beginning of 2005, the state firm concluded an agreement on refurbishing six 33-year-old diesel engines at a cost of 605,000 euros per unit -- at least twice the market value. Inquiries later determined that the address listed for one of the companies involved was nonexistent. 
