24/08/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 24/08/2005
A recently unearthed ancient treasure, containing over 15,000 gold items and dating back more than 4,000 years, went on display at Bulgaria's National Museum of History (NMH) on Wednesday (17 August). Experts say it is comparable to that found at Troy in 1873 by amateur German archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann. 
"This treasure is a bit older than Schliemann's finds in Troy and contains many more golden ornaments," said Vasil Nikolov, director of the Bulgarian Archaeological Institute, who oversaw the dig. 
The artefacts, dating back to the 3rd millennium BC, were found during ten months of excavations at three burial mounds near the village of Dabene, about 130km east of the country's capital. As the digging continues, thousands of new objects could be unearthed. 
"I think by the end of the year, we will have found around 100,000 items," NHM Director Bozhidar Dimitrov told Reuters. 
The first clue suggesting the existence of Bronze Age gold at Dabene came last year. Two young NHM archaeologists were buying cigarettes at a village shop when they saw a farmer's wife wearing an exquisitely-wrought gold necklace. The woman told them that her husband had come across it while ploughing his fields with his tractor. 
A team of archaeologists was then sent to Dabene and excavation works began in autumn of last year. 
Most of the items unearthed thus far are miniature beads and rings that were elements of different pieces of jewellery believed to have been worn as part of funerary regalia. 
The fact that the point where some of the rings are welded is invisible with an ordinary microscope is cited as an illustration of the expert craftsmanship of those who made them. 
"We don't know who these people were, but we call them proto-Thracians," Nikolov was quoted as saying. 
The Thracians lived in present-day Bulgaria and parts of modern Greece, Romania, Macedonia and Turkey between 4,000 B.C. and the 8th century A.D., when they were assimilated by invading Slavs. 
The artifacts found at Dabene were the work of a people preceding the Thracians, Dimitrov agreed. According to him, the treasure left behind by the still unidentified civilisation is an indication that the heart of modern Bulgaria was a gold-mining and processing centre during the Bronze Age. It is the largest trove found in the Balkans dating back to those times. 
"We can conclude that around 5,000 years ago, the centre of an until now unknown civilisation was here and it exported processed gold in central Europe, the Balkan peninsula and Anatolia on a massive scale," Dimitrov told Reuters. 
The newly unearthed treasure is of immense significance, a leading expert on ancient Southeast European history told the British daily Independent. 
"The discovery of Bronze Age gold at Dabene is of great international importance and should tell us more about the gold trade in the ancient world," said Dr Zosia Archibald of Liverpool University. 
The past two years have proven extremely productive for Bulgarian archaeologists. July saw the unearthing of a 50-item collection of 2,400-year-old Thracian riches, including a golden wreath with an image of the Greek goddess Nike. Last year, archaeologists unearthed a solid gold mask resembling the "Mask of Agamemnon" discovered by Schliemann in Troy. 
