15/06/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 15/06/06
The number of people below the poverty line in Croatia basically has remained unchanged since 1999, even though the country's GNP has doubled over the past ten years. The Croatian economy has grown faster than the EU member-country average, but the number of people living in poverty remains the same, according to government data. 
Those who receive permanent social help in Croatia receive just 55 euros a month due to limited resources. Due to low pension funds and unstable salaries, almost 500,000 Croats are under the social minimum, a term that refers to the level of income needed for a person or family to live without major deprivation. Most of those below the threshold live in rural areas, and make their living working the land. Many are not eligible for assistance under the regulations. 
Half of the government funding for social assistance -- about 2 per cent of the GNP -- is spent on single households. One third of the remainder goes to families with children and single parent families. Almost half of social help recipients are over 40 years old. 
More than 40 per cent of the recipients did not finish elementary school, one-third have an elementary school education and one-fourth have finished high school. Regionally, south and eastern Croatia are poorer than the north and western parts of the country. More than 70 per cent of those who are considered poor are concentrated in central and eastern Croatia. The largest numbers reside in areas damaged in the 1990s conflict. 
The government is currently working to develop a National Strategy of Health and a project that will redevelop the social welfare system as a measure against poverty and social exclusivity. The new criteria link financial help from the state to income and property status and close loopholes existing under the current system. For example, a person who owns a hotel or a company, but registers an income of only 214 euros a month, may currently be eligible for aid even though they are not in need of it. 
"That is why an asset census is one of the possible models for new social politics" said Health and Social Care Minister Neven Ljubicic. 
Under the planned reform, every citizen will receive an asset card from the government. On this card, they must record all profits and properties they own. The authorities will use this information to determine who will receive financial assistance. 
Croatia has a GNP of 7,000 euros per capita. Despite those figures, Croatia is still far from having a stable social policy structure. Many hope an infusion of EU assistance, now that Croatia is a candidate country, will help tackle the problem. 
