05/10/2011
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Bitola -- 05/10/11
Macedonia and the region suffer from declining birth rates, increasing mortality rates and an aging population. This pressing problem, known colloquially as the "white plague", threatens regional countries' economic sustainability and long-term survival. 
Contributing to the low birth rates is infertility, which experts say is a result of multiple factors including stressful and unhealthy lifestyles and sexually transmitted diseases. 
"About 15% of married couples in Macedonia are infertile. Between 60% and 70% decide for in vitro fertilisation (IVF) and other assisted reproduction methods," Dr. Elizabeta Chipurova, head of the OB-GYN department at Bitola's State Hospital, told SETimes. 
The Macedonian government attempted to address this problem three years ago by preparing a Strategy for Demographic Development 2008-2015. 
The strategy specifies measures to create conditions for sustainable demographic development as a first priority. They include free, assisted reproduction programmes for women at both state or private clinics and encouraging the opening of new, modern facilities to assist infertile couples. 
While there are very modern medical facilities such as Sistina, Remedika and St Lazarus, they are all located in Skopje. 
However, Macedonia's specialised reproductive services hospital Plodnost (Fertility) began its work in Bitola last month. 
"This is the only such comprehensive fertility clinic in the southwestern part of Macedonia. Because of its location, it serves the needs of the wider southern Balkan region, including Greece and Albania. Foreign patients now make up 10% of the total but we expect this number to increase substantially," clinic head Dr Tashe Trpchevski told SETimes. 
Trpchevski said the clinic has had an exceptionally good start, including 36 surgical treatments in the first ten days and two babies delivered to mothers in their early 40s. 
"I waited for my child for 21 years; this is the most beautiful moment of my life," patient Valentina Velkovska told SETimes. 
Trpchevski explained that many patients are limited elsewhere by the treatments' cost, but said at Plodnost the prices are affordable. 
"The price of similar services abroad can be 300 times higher. This is why we expect the number of patients to increase," he said. 
With 26 years of experience, Trpchevski is a veteran in the field of infertility treatments. He established Plodnost as a private practice office in 2004 and has assisted 514 women in giving birth. 
"The IVF treatments resulted in 50% births which is a very high percentage," Trpchevski said. 
The hospital introduced a PDG method which enables choosing the embryo and its gender. "The doctors and support personnel are quite impressed; everything we need from technology to medication is provided right away," anesthesiologist Rade Bjelic told SETimes. 
In Macedonia, assisted reproduction treatments are fully covered by the Fund for State Insurance for almost a year. The government just widened eligibility requirements to include an ever greater number of women and men. 
Couples in which the partners had children in previous marriages or in legally-approved co-habitation but now experience infertility, are eligible for free IVF treatments under the government's new policy. 
Also eligible are couples who already had children with physical disabilities. 
