17/08/2010
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 17/08/10 
The US State Department's annual report on security in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), published on August 8th, has caused a stir. BiH officials say the findings point to the need for reform, while leaders in the entity Republika Srpska say they amount to a political ploy. 
"Bosnia and Herzegovina has a fragmented security system that cannot meet the challenges, especially of a global threat, such as terrorism and drug trafficking," BiH Security Minister Sadik Ahmetovic told SETimes. "It is, therefore, necessary to establish a single police structure in BiH." 
 Republika Srpska Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, however, claims the report is a thinly disguised effort to force changes the Bosnian Serb entity opposes. It demonstrates "a stereotyped and uncritical approach to the problems in Bosnia," he said, adding that it unfairly blames RS for dangerous terrorist elements within the country. 
"There are no terrorists in RS," he said. "All radical movements in Bosnia and Herzegovina -- Wahhabi, 'White al-Qaeda' and others who represent the basis for potential terrorists -- have expressed anti-Serb sentiment," Dodik said. 
The State Department report said the fight against terrorism and terrorist financing in BiH is hampered by "efforts of RS officials to undermine state institutions". 
"BiH remains a weak, decentralised state with poor inter-agency communication and security agencies that are competing for authority. All these factors have resulted in BiH [being] the subject that could potentially be used for terrorist operations in Europe," the report says. 
At the state level, the Intelligence and Security Agency and the Agency for Investigation and Protection are currently operating, while entities and cantons in the Federation are under police jurisdiction. 
"To ensure maximum efficiency in the fight against terrorism, attempts to undermine the work of institutions at the state level must be stopped," the US Embassy in Sarajevo said in a statement. 
 "The United States remains committed to close collaboration at all levels with all the security agencies and institutions responsible for implementing laws aimed at combating terrorism in BiH," it said. 
According to political analyst Milos Solaja, the efficiency of institutions is more important than their organisational structure when it comes to fighting terrorism. 
"To be fair, BiH is a source of terrorist threats. Washington only requires that the fight against terrorism be effective and that the RS in its own way participates," Solaja told SETimes. 
RS, he said, is unhappy with the report because of the entity's general opposition to transferring jurisdiction to the BiH state. 
"Washington is looking for ways to control radical Islam and potential terrorists. Instead of politicising the State Department report, it's more important to find ways and determine procedures within the existing institutions for a successful fight against terrorism," he said. 
