13/04/2009
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 13/04/09
Russia's Gazprom is in the final stages of negotiations with partner countries on the South Stream pipeline, completion of which is expected in 2015. Among the partners is Serbia, where public opinion and the political opposition are expressing concern over the implications of partnership with Gazprom. 
Serbia had had great expectations of what South Stream could do. It promises to yield fat gas transit fees for Serbia. Gazprom Vice President Aleksandar Medvedev said Russia will guarantee Serbia 10 billion cubic metres of gas annually from the pipeline's anticipated 47-billion-cubic-metre capacity, a boon for an energy-poor country that suffered in the 2008-2009 winter when a Russian-Ukrainian dispute cut off natural gas to the Balkans. 
But Serbian public opinion reacted unfavourably to the announcement that Srbijagas and Gazprom will form a second joint venture to build Serbia's 400km segment of the pipeline. Raising even more questions, the joint venture's headquarters will be in Zug, Switzerland, out of reach of both Serbian and EU authorities. 
Experts and opposition leaders wonder why an already-existing Serbian-Russian joint venture will not build the pipeline and question, given the Swiss location of the second venture, where the potential 200m euros in annual transit fees will end up. 
 In past months, successive Russian delegations increased the frequency of their visits to Belgrade. Besides expressing bright hopes for Russo-Serbian energy co-operation, they reaffirmed their support for Serbia's stance on Kosovo. 
Medvedev, in remarks quoted by Vecernje Novosti on March 28th, assured Serbians that a recent revision in the South Stream contract would mean "an increase in transit [of natural gas] through your territory". 
Much of the Serbian public, though, was unmoved by such promises, believing instead that Belgrade sold NIS -- the Serbian state oil company -- to Gazprom for far too little money, in pursuit of Russian diplomatic backing. 
 Last December, Gazprom subsidiary Gazpromneft bought NIS for 400m euros, under an obligation to invest 500m euros by 2012. Experts had placed the Serbian company's true value at 2.2 billion euros, which included two refineries and 400 gas stations and other considerable assets. 
Now that Moscow is arguably in a position to dictate Serbia's energy future, the dark side of the bilateral partnership is slowly emerging. After assuming ownership of NIS, the Russians published a 2008 financial report and claimed a loss of 47m euros, versus the previously declared profit of 28m euros. The accounting firm KPMG will give the last word on the matter. 
Adding to Serbian misgivings about the wisdom of partnering so closely with Russia, Gazpromneft is now demanding that a Belgrade court annul the write-off by previous NIS management of 100m euros of debt owed by state-owned companies as well as by Serbia's police and the military to NIS. In addition, Gazpromneft is disputing an earlier sale by NIS of a 6.6m-euro stake in the Belgrade Hyatt Regency hotel. 
