11/05/2011
By Linda Karadaku, Bedrana Kaletovic and Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times -- 11/05/11 
For countries in the Balkans, Osama bin Laden's death on May 1st provided an opportunity to re-assess the security situation in the region. 
Although governments generally do not perceive a direct threat from al-Qaeda, they are nevertheless taking precautions against possible retaliatory action by jihadists. Meanwhile, leaders reiterated their support for the ongoing struggle against violent extremism. 
In Albania, many analysts stress that radical forms of Islam have not succeeded in taking root among the population. Most Albanians are moderates, and traditional viewpoints have held their own against Salafist interpretations of Islam imported from abroad. 
"The old trend, the tradition has won," Fatos Klosi, a former head of the country's secret service, tells SETimes. "Albania has not been a country endangered by Islamism." 
"The main opposition in Albania against religious fundamentalism has come from within the Albanian Muslim community itself," says analyst Ilir Kulla, former head of the foreign ministry's Religions and Cults Office. 
According to Kulla, bin Laden's death will not have any direct implication on the security situation in Albania. 
"On the contrary, it increases trust in the maximal effectiveness of NATO as the alliance in which Albania participates. It also increases trust that state structures can achieve important results if they want and if they insist, against any forms of fundamentalism," he told SETimes. 
According to Mentor Vrajolli from the Kosovo Centre for Security Studies, Kosovo Muslims are also moderate and the acts of al-Qaeda are viewed as abhorrent. 
"Osama has been a danger and humiliation for the social and religious values that our society has cultivated for centuries. The physical elimination of Osama bin Laden has been welcomed by the absolute majority," he says. 
"Looking at it from the local, state perspective, Kosovo has never been threatened. But from the regional and global perspective, it feels safer [after bin Laden's death]," Kosovo Police member Brahim Kadriu tells SETimes. 
In Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), meanwhile, security measures have been ramped up, especially with regard to diplomatic and consular missions in the country. 
The Directorate for the Co-ordination of the Police Bodies of BiH "has taken [appropriate] measures … with the goal of complete security of buildings and persons", directorate chief Himzo Selimovic told SETimes. 
He stressed that all the police agencies in the country -- which remains divided institutionally between the Bosniak-Croat and Serb entities -- have been co-operating with each other and exchanging intelligence. 
In Serbia, officials commended the US operation against bin Laden. 
"We are aware that there are connections between al-Qaeda and radical Islamist organisations in this part of Europe, and we will continue to work with the intelligence community of the world, of which we are a part," Serbian President Boris Tadic said. "I am confident that Serbian citizens will have necessary security in the future." 
Interior Minister Ivica Dacic said that although there is no information regarding a possible terrorist attack directly against Serbia, the country will continue to co-operate with other countries to counter the threat of international terrorism. 
