24/11/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 24/11/09
Romania underwent the bloodiest transition from communism to democracy in Eastern Europe, a process that still can't be neatly summed up in history books. 
More than 1,500 deaths were reported in clashes between protesters and authorities in December 1989, which precipitated the fall of Nicolae Ceausescu's totalitarian regime. 
"It is sad that 20 years after these events, we still don't know what happened," said President Traian Basescu last week, calling for a through investigation into the historic events. 
The Romanian revolution started in Timisoara, Romania's second largest city, where thousands of parishioners began a protest against the authorities' decision to forcibly move priest Laszlo Tokes to a village. 
Tokes publicly criticised the regime and was often cited in the foreign press. This prompted the secret police, Securitate, to keep close tabs on him. 
However, the parishioners' protest soon drew thousands, who filled Timisoara's central square and chanted "Down with Ceausescu". 
As the numbers grew, the Romanian Army quickly moved in to crush the protests. 
A.G., an army draftee, was flown to Timisoara under strict orders to collect intelligence and passively interfere with protesters. 
 "The people were so frenzied and furious after the army opened fire, they recognised us because of our athletic bodies, short haircuts and inquisitive looks and chased us in the streets," he told SETimes. 
A.G. explains the orders to suppress the rallies remained in force "until the Minister of Defence, General Vasile Milea, committed suicide. Then it all changed. The army laid down the weapons and started fraternising with the people." 
The Timisoara protests soon spread to Cluj-Napoca, Sibiu and Bucharest. 
Ceausescu called a public rally on December 22nd 1989, but it turned against him. Hundreds of thousands gathered in front of the former communist party headquarters, now called Revolution Square. Ceausescu tried to flee but was caught near Targoviste and executed on Christmas after a hasty trial. 
Twenty years later, Romania is a democracy and an EU and NATO member. However, the question of whether the 1989 revolution was a coup or a popular revolt sparked by a half-a-century of oppression still remains. 
Many in the country wonder why the post-communist Romanian leadership is made of many former communist dignitaries, and why the Securitate's archives are not fully accessible. 
The country continues, however, to move away from its communist heritage. 
