13/10/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 13/10/05
Serbia-Montenegro tops the list of countries that have done the most to enact reforms meant to improve the climate for business, a recent report from the World Bank concludes. The report, "Doing Business in 2004: Creating Jobs", provides the first global ranking of 155 nations in terms of key business regulations and reforms.
It finds that the former communist nations of Eastern Europe, including Southeast European countries, have aggressively sought entrepreneurs and investors by enacting major reforms designed to cut red tape and reduce taxes. Meanwhile, Serbia-Montenegro ranked first among the top 12 reformers worldwide, ahead of Georgia, Vietnam, Slovakia, Germany, Egypt, Finland, Romania, Latvia, Pakistan, Rwanda and the Netherlands.
"There are other countries, Slovakia, Poland, Ukraine, which made greater progress than Serbia-Montenegro in particular areas, but overall, when all areas are considered together, Serbia-Montenegro has made the greatest progress in reforms," said Vesna Kostic, the World Bank's spokesperson in the country. 
According to the 188-page study, Serbia-Montenegro improved in eight of the ten areas examined in the report. It has simplified the procedures for starting a business, obtaining a license, hiring and firing, registering property, paying taxes, closing a business and entering bankruptcy. In two areas -- investor protection and foreign trade -- progress was not registered. The capital required for starting a business was reduced from 5,000 euros to 500 euros, while the time needed for registering a company has been reduced from 51 days to 15 days. 
Carolina Jungr, director of World Bank's Belgrade office, has welcomed the progress, while striking a cautionary note. It is important, she says, that the momentum be sustained.
"A lot of good things have happened and some credit is due to the government," the AP quoted her as saying. "There has been tremendous progress, just as long as you don't put up your feet and say you are done." Serbia-Montenegro embarked on its reforms relatively late compared to other countries in the region, Jungr notes, and must still work hard to catch up.
In particular, World Bank experts want to see court cases accelerated, land property rules simplified, and foreign trade made easier.
Serbian Minister of Economy Predrag Bubalo welcomed the report, but says it will be awhile yet before the reforms translate into better quality of life for Serbian citizens. "What has changed is that there will be more jobs, we will have to work more and only after a long period of time citizens will feel, both financially and in other ways, these improvements," he said.
Foreign investors are pleased with the pace of reforms and insist that there should be now slowing down. "There are things that are not functioning the way they should, but we did not expect everything to be perfect in two years, anyway. We have a plan and I am satisfied because I see progress," said Nis Tobacco Factory Director Eugenio Sidoli.
