29/12/2009
(Reuters, RTTNews - 29/12/09; IMF, Wall Street Journal - 28/12/09)
Macedonia is on track to return to economic growth next year, the IMF said on Monday (December 28th), praising authorities for taking prudent fiscal and monetary steps in the face of global turmoil. 
The anticipated 1.3% contraction this year is expected to be followed by a GDP growth of 2% in 2010, the Washington-based international financial institution noted in an annual review of the Macedonian economy. 
Macedonia was able to cushion the impact of worldwide economic woes and its downturn was modest compared to other countries in the Balkans, Fund executive directors said, citing the country's macroeconomic policies as one of the reasons. 
Export demand fell and external financing decreased as the global crisis hit Macedonia in late 2008. As a result, the country's economy experienced a sharp slowdown, tax revenues shrank and the central bank's foreign exchange reserves dropped significantly. 
In response, the government cut planned spending increases and issued euro-denominated bonds worth 175m euros in July, which helped increase reserves and ensured sufficient budget financing. The National Bank of Macedonia managed to slow credit growth and contain the loss of reserves by tightening the bank liquidity and reserve requirements and by raising its policy rate from 7% to 9%. 
The prudent fiscal and monetary policies and the exchange rate peg to the euro served Macedonia well, as the situation in the country had stabilised and confidence had improved by the second half of this year, according to the IMF. The Fund also noted that there is no significant exchange rate misalignment and urged Skopje to carry out structural reforms, particularly in the public administration sector and the judiciary, to increase the country's competitiveness and secure more foreign direct investment. 
But the IMF also warned of some problems. 
"The large -- albeit reduced -- current account deficit in the context of an exchange rate peg is a source of vulnerability and limits the room for policy manoeuvre," the Fund stressed. "In the near term, supporting growth while reducing external imbalances will remain a key challenge." 
Welcoming the tightening of monetary policy in the first half of 2009, the IMF executive directors voiced support for the recent cut in the policy rate, given more conducive conditions. But they also cautioned Macedonian authorities that plans to ease monetary policies should not be taken until there are "clear signs of lasting favourable trends in the balance of payments and international reserves". 
The IMF directors also said that authorities' revenue projections for 2010 may prove somewhat optimistic, but welcomed their readiness to take the needed steps to meet the deficit target of 2.5% of GDP envisioned in the country's budget for next year. 
"Directors were encouraged by the broadly healthy condition of the banking system and its low reliance on external funding," the Fund said in its statement Monday. The IMF board also welcomed plans to take steps towards strengthening crisis response mechanisms and to adopt legislation that will allow them to intervene in troubled banks without being subject to court challenge. 
