27/05/2008
(AP, EurActiv, Xinhua, Balkan Insight, B92, Fena, European Commission - 26/05/08)
The EU started visa liberalisation talks with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) in Brussels on Monday (May 26th), three weeks before the signing of the Balkan country's long-delayed pre-membership agreement with the 27-nation bloc. 
 "By opening the dialogue on visa-free travel, the European Union proves its determination towards achieving the common objective of free movement for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina," European Commission (EC) Vice President Jacques Barrot said at a ceremony, marking the official launch of negotiations. 
The EU will lift the visa restrictions BiH citizens currently face after their country implements a set of conditions. Barrot said that within the next few weeks, BiH authorities will receive a roadmap detailing all the benchmarks that will have to be met. 
 Measures the EU will push for include introduction of biometric passports, ensuring proper protection of the country's borders and fighting organised crime, corruption and illegal immigration, he indicated. 
Barrot, who replaced Franco Frattini as the EU's top official in charge of justice and home affairs issues earlier this month, would not speculate as to how long the negotiations process could take. He voiced confidence, however, that BiH would take quick steps to meet the EU requirements. 
 The pace of the negotiations "will be determined by the ability of Bosnia to fulfill the necessary conditions and reforms", he stressed. 
BiH Prime Minister Nikola Spiric, who attended Monday's ceremony, welcomed the decision to launch talks, saying it would "reinforce the European idea" in his country. 
"We are committed to fulfilling all the conditions from the roadmap," Balkan Insight quoted him as saying in Brussels."Our aim is a visa-free regime for all citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina." 
The EC took the first step towards full visa liberalisation last year by signing visa facilitation agreements with all Western Balkan countries. Under the accords, which entered into force on January 1st, the fees for EU visas were reduced from 60 euros to 35 euros. For certain categories, such as children and pensioners, they were eliminated altogether. 
The agreements also simplified and accelerated the visa process for many other groups, including students, athletes, cultural workers, journalists, people in need of medical treatment and businessmen working with EU companies. 
The EC then decided to open technical visa liberalisation negotiations with all Western Balkan countries, with the aim of wrapping up the process by January 1st, 2009. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, who also attended Monday's ceremony, welcomed the launch of negotiations aimed at achieving visa free travel for all citizens of BiH. 
 "It is particularly good news for the younger generation who, through mobility, will have the opportunity to gain first-hand experience of the EU," he said. "Visa free travel is also key for business, and thus for economic development and job creation." 
Rehn also confirmed that the EU will sign BiH's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the Union on June 16th. The accord, seen as a major first step towards eventual membership in the bloc, must then be ratified by all EU member nations. 
