16/03/2013
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/03/13
Novi Pazar Mayor Meho Mahmutovic is focusing on improving the region's infrastructure which will, in turn, draw investors and jobs to the Sandzak region of Serbia, he said. 
"The infrastructure organisation of the city and of the entire Sandzak region is a prerequisite for bringing in any investor, foreign or domestic. Over the past three years we have worked on repairing and enhancing streets, as many at the very centre of the city had not been asphalted," Mahmutovic told SETimes. 
Novi Pazar, the centre of the Sandzak region, is home to about 100,000 people, 82 percent of whom are Bosniaks. Like the rest of the country, the Sandzak region is facing poverty, poor infrastructure and unemployment. But while the average unemployment rate in Serbia about 25 percent, in Novi Pazar about 50 percent of the working age population are jobless. 
Mahmutovic said that many of the local and regional roads leading to and from Novi Pazar have to be repaired. 
"There are sections of roads for which plans have existed for years, and Turkey's Eximbank has earmarked funds for their repair," he said. 
According to Serbia Minister without Portfolio Sulejman Ugljanin, negotiations are in progress with Eximbank, which has 300 million dollars for projects in Serbia this year. 
"Our focus is on two regional roads, Novi Pazar-Aljinovici and Pazariste-Tutin, which will connect Sandzak to the future Corridor 11. That project is important for both the region and the whole country, because it is difficult to attract investors without a good infrastructure," Ugljanin told SETimes. 
The Ladjevci Airport near Kraljevo is also an important project for the Sandzak region, Mahmutovic said. Plans are under way to turn the military airport into a civilian one. 
"Serbia has secured sufficient funds, with the planned 10 million euros to be invested by Turkey, and this project should be completed soon," Mahmutovic said. 
The citizens of Novi Pazar said the infrastructure in the town is better than it was several years ago, but there is a lot more work to be done. 
"Up until two years ago, certain streets in the very centre of the town hadn't been asphalted -- now the town looks better. However, there's still much left to do. The roads to and from Novi Pazar … are in such a poor state that in some sections driving can be life threatening. They need to be repaired urgently," Ibrahim Saletovic, a veterinarian from Novi Pazar, told SETimes. 
The Novi Pazar government is ready to provide future investors with benefits including reduced fees and streamlined administrative procedures. 
"Every investor should know they are welcome in Novi Pazar," the mayor said. 
