16/04/2008
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 16/04/08
Following the addition of the Old Bridge in Mostar to the World Heritage List in 2005, UNESCO recently added another Ottoman bridge in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) to the distinguished group of world monuments. 
Considered a masterpiece of Ottoman architecture, the Mehmed Pasha Sokolovic Bridge was built at the end of the 16th century in the eastern BiH town of Visegrad, where it spans the Drina River, the historic border with Serbia. 
The stone bridge is 179.5m long and has 11 arches. It was commissioned by the Ottoman sultan's Bosnian-born grand vizier, Mehmed Pasha Sokolovic. Designed by Mimar Koca Sinan (1489-1588), widely considered the finest architect of the Ottoman Empire, the span is one of six built by him that remain. 
At the end of March, UNESCO Director Koichiro Matsuura presented BiH authorities in Sarajevo with a certificate of the bridge's addition to the UNESCO registry. 
 "Its cultural value transcends both national and cultural borders," said Matsuura. 
 History made the bridge a Balkan icon. It is the best-known "character" in Nobel Prize-winning author Ivo Andric's 1945 book, "The Bridge on the Drina." The novel describes relations between Orthodox Christian Serbs and Muslims in Visegrad during the Ottoman occupation. In the book, the bridge spans not only a river but the city's religious gulf as well, yet it can serve the latter purpose only imperfectly. 
Disputes rooted in more recent history forced Matsuura to cancel a planned visit to Visegrad for security reasons. During his trip to BiH, the Association of Women Victims of War, primarily a Bosniak group, placed a placard on the bridge to commemorate the victims of the BiH conflict. Local Bosnian Serb authorities removed the placard one day later. 
In 1992, hardline Bosnian Serbs committed atrocities in Visegrad against the town's Bosniak population. Three thousand Bosniaks, including 121 children, were killed, many at the bridge itself. Following the Dayton Peace Agreement, the town stayed within the Bosnian Serb-led Republika Srpska. 
At the ceremony marking the bridge's listing as a World Heritage Site, BiH Presidency Chairman Haris Silajdzic said that those who survived that conflict "deserve our respect". 
The Mehmed Pasha Sokolovic Bridge remains a remarkable tourist attraction after witnessing so many historic upheavals. It retains much of its original appearance, although it underwent repairs several times. The World Monuments Watch placed the span on its list of the world's 100 most endangered sites in 2006. 
