13/03/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 13/03/13
The main political parties in Kosovo, with the exception of Vetvendosje Movement, agreed to shorten the country's election campaign time from 30 days to 15 days. Under the election law reform, party leaders also agreed that Kosovo will remain a single electoral area. 
Some voters see a benefit from a shorter campaign. 
Shqyprim Ilazi, Pristina bus controller, said a shorter campaign will decrease the level of propaganda from political parties. 
"Previously, it was terrible that for a whole month, at all times, and all over the country a campaign was on. Not really desired. I hope they [politicians] will be able to control themselves," Ilazi said. 
Luljeta Prekazi, a student in Mitrovica, told SETimes that with a shorter campaign, political parties should focus more on the message they send to voters. 
"If we look at the political language going on now, we can easily say that the election campaign already started, so their agreement is just procedural," Prekazi said. 
However, Selatin Kllokoqi, researcher at Democracy4Development, a Pristina-based NGO, told SETimes that the agreement could cause problems. 
He thinks a shorter campaign could increase tensions between political parties, because of the likelihood that organised election rallies may happen simultaneously. 
"[The lack of] room reservations and other facilities for political gatherings will create political tensions among the parties, especially for those that decide which party will give priority in the booking hall election rally," llokoqi said. 
Vetvendosje wants campaigning to last 30 days because, they said, a shorter campaign does not give parties enough time to develop their campaigns to citizens. 
"Those who want a shorter campaign want to reduce the costs. In fact, the costs don't depend on the number of days, but on the kind of campaign activities they conduct," Albulena Haxhiu, Vetvendosje MP, told SETimes. 
Kllokoqi expects the costs to be lower for political parties, but said that will not solve other issues. 
"The best solution would be if the cost of an election campaign is more transparent, to know exactly the source of the campaign income, than to shorten the campaign time," Kllokoqi said. 
The Kosovo Democratic Party did not respond to requests for comment. 
