13/01/2005
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 13/01/05
Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski's two-day visit to neighbouring Albania this week was his first official trip abroad since taking office late last year. Arriving in Tirana on Wednesday (12 January), he met with President Alfred Moisiu, Prime Minister Fatos Nano and Assembly Speaker Servet Pellumbi. 
Regional issues and ways of boosting co-operation between Skopje and Tirana were the focus of the talks. Buckovski and Nano both agreed that economic co-operation should be the main priority for bilateral relations this year. They expressed satisfaction with the level of co-operation between their interior ministries in preventing transborder crime. They also agreed to work together to resolve pending border issues, such as borderlines that split villages or individual family properties. 
"We requested Albania's assistance in the definition of the border between Macedonia and Kosovo. For this we would need also the support of UNMIK and the government in Belgrade," Buckovski told reporters during a joint news conference with Nano, adding that the issue should be resolved before any decision is reached on Kosovo's final status. 
Welcoming Buckovski's initiative, Nano said UN resolutions for Kosovo should serve as the basis for resolving any border problems. He also emphasised the importance of US and EU participation in the process. 
The dispute between Greece and Macedonia over the latter's constitutional name was also discussed, with Buckovski receiving assurances from Nano that Albania is ready to assist with efforts to reach a solution. Moving beyond such issues would "contribute to the stability and the Euro-Atlantic integration" of countries in Southeast Europe, Nano said. 
Albanian-Macedonian relations are "excellent" and an "example for the whole region," the prime ministers said. 
During his meeting with Buckovski, Moisiu praised Macedonia's democratisation process and its accomplishments in building a multiethnic society. He emphasised the importance of bilateral agreements on economic issues, free trade, and energy, as well as the two countries' joint efforts towards completion of Transport Corridor 8 and the AMBO oil pipeline. 
