24/06/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 24/06/08 
NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer announced on Monday (June 23rd) in Pristina that the new Kosovo Security Force, rather than being an army, will have "specific duties". 
 "NATO will lead the transformation of the current Kosovo Protection Corps and the creation of the Kosovo Security Force, which will have 2,500 members and some 800 reserve members with specific duties," said de Hoop Scheffer at a press conference in Pristina after meeting with President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and Parliament Speaker Jakup Krasniqi. 
De Hoop Scheffer explained that the personnel decision came from NATO. "I believe that we will have a multiethnic force under the mandate of KFOR," he predicted. 
He noted that if the situation became fragile, NATO would reinforce its mission in Kosovo. He described the task of the 16,000-strong KFOR as ensuring peace and security for both the majority and minority communities. 
 "KFOR is here; it's here to stay. KFOR has a mandate and the necessary troops, and, if necessary, KFOR has reinforcements," said de Hoop Scheffer. 
As for the new international civil mission in Kosovo, the NATO chief said that he asked for co-operation between the UN and EU, as well as with NATO. "This time, it is very important to have co-operation among all international organisations," he said. 
 "I am confident that after these talks, we will have a better relationship," he continued, adding that eventually UNMIK's staff will be reduced and it is important that KFOR remain under its mandate working with other organisations. 
On the other hand, he rejected the prospect of a divided Kosovo, saying "any form of partition is not an option". 
De Hoop Scheffer said NATO-led peacekeeping forces in Kosovo would continue to work within their powers as defined by UN Security Council Resolution 1244. 
He described NATO's position on Kosovo's status as neutral. "Recognition is not our job. We have NATO members who've recognised Kosovo and members who haven't recognised Kosovo, but what's important to know is that all the NATO allies are in KFOR and will stay there," said de Hoop Scheffer. 
