26/07/2011
By Mirjana Boskovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 26/07/11
More than 30,000 citizens opted not to declare their nationality in the April census, the results of which were recently announced, triggering diverse reactions in Montenegro and the region. 
The figure amounts to 5% of Montenegro's population and equals the size of a larger city like Herceg Novi. 
"Among the undeclared there is fear and revolt. There was pressure on citizens by the opposition [to declare national affiliation] in addition to the ruling parties exerting constant pressure. If not seen as 'opposition pressure', it certainly weighed in," European Movement in Montenegro President Momcilo Radulovic told SETimes. 
Some citizens say they fear that they could lose their jobs or otherwise have their interests damaged. 
According to the recently announced census results, Montenegrins and Serbs are most numerous, comprising 44.98% and 28.73% of the total population, respectively. 
There are nearly 2% more Montenegrins compared to 2003 and more than 3% fewer Serbs. 
The census results also showed a negligible decrease in the number of Bosniaks, Albanians, Croats and a decrease of 0.5% among Muslims, while the Roma doubled their numbers. 
Experts say it is worrisome that so many people do not want to declare their nationality. 
"Not a small number of people are fed up by divisions which have lasted for over two decades," Professor Svetozar Jovicevic told SETimes. 
In the 1981 census, only 0.05% of citizens did not want to declare their nationality. 
In contrast, Professor Filip Kovacevic argues, fear is not a reason because all those afraid of any negative consequences already declared themselves Montenegrins. 
"At work is a revolt or resistance against placing oneself in a narrow ethnic-national frame. Montenegrin politics is so burdened -- and thus degraded -- with 'identity' questions that this was perhaps one of the most commonsense answers," Kovacevic told SETimes. 
Analysts say the identity question in Montenegro is far from solved, but Radulovic claims the revolt speaks volumes about the mentality, political culture and civil bravery. 
"The current technical part of the process to join the EU goes much quicker than the societal one," he notes. 
Radulovic blames the government and the opposition for creating a tense situation before the census and tying it to daily politics, and said both must stop exerting pressure on citizens. 
While most political parties accepted the census results as reflecting a realistic picture of Montenegro, the New Serbian Democracy (NSD) says it does not. NDS leader Andrija Mandic said the data relating to the Serbian people and language are incorrect and the actual figure is 33% -- 4% more than reported. 
The results caused a reaction in Serbia among the pro-nationalist circles. The Democratic Serbian Party (DSS) issued a statement calling the results "alarming because of obvious irregularities". 
"Because years of pressure on the Serbs and the government's permanent direction to reduce the importance and the right of public use of the Serbian language did not bear fruit, they employed the last available means -- falsification of the census results. Such a step of openly breaking basic human rights is characteristic only of undemocratic regimes," the DSS added. 
