07/08/2009
(FT, Zaman, Itar-Tass - 07/08/09; Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, Bloomberg, NYT, BBC, RFE/RL, Euronews, RIA Novosti - 06/08/09)
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, signed a series of energy agreements in Ankara on Thursday (August 6th) that gave a boost to Turkey's ambitions to become a regional oil and gas hub. 
The accords, viewed as reflecting Ankara's drive for greater political clout in the region, include one on the Kremlin-backed South Stream gas pipeline project, conceived by Russia's Gazprom and Italy's Eni SpA. 
According to plans, the 900km pipeline, designed to carry Russian natural gas to Europe, will run under the Black Sea from Russia to Bulgaria and then fork into two branches -- a northern one to Austria via Serbia and Hungary and a southern one through Greece to Italy. 
By signing the deal on South Stream, Turkey gave its consent for a section of the link to cross its territorial waters in the Black Sea, which will allow Russia to avoid passing through Ukrainian waters. 
This will allow Gazprom to carry out seismic and environmental surveys in the Turkish sea waters before laying the pipe, he explained after the signing ceremony, which was also attended by Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, in a gesture of support for Eni SpA. 
Construction is scheduled to begin next year, and the 9-billion-euro project is expected to wrap up in 2015. Once the pipeline becomes fully operational, it will pump 63 billion cubic metres of Russian gas to Europe per year. 
South Stream is widely viewed as a rival to the planned Nabucco pipeline, designed to carry Caspian and Middle East natural gas to Europe via Turkey, bypassing Russia. The aim of the nearly 8-billion-euro US and EU-backed project is to reduce Europe's dependence on Russian gas. 
Thursday's deal came less than a month after senior officials from Turkey and the other four participating countries -- Austria, Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania -- signed a transit agreement for the Nabucco project in Ankara on July 13th. 
Erdogan insisted Thursday that the two gas pipeline projects should not be viewed "in the context of rivalry but of diversification". 
 Putin, who also on Thursday formally rejected Russia's participation in the 1991 European Energy Charter, aimed at integrating the energy systems of eastern and western Europe along market lines, echoed the Turkish prime minister's words. 
"Construction of the South Stream does not block Nabucco," the Russian leader said. "Depending on demand from consumers, both projects can be realised… The more infrastructure projects, the better, because that will create reliability and stability of energy supply to Europe." 
The agreements concluded during Putin's one-day visit to Ankara included an accord on the peaceful use of nuclear energy and another on exchange of information on nuclear energy facilities. Turkey wants to build its first nuclear power plant in Akkuyu, some 350km east of the Mediterranean coastal city of Antalya and is considering a bid by Russia's AtomStroyExport to build the station. 
