25/10/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 25/10/06
Visiting Montenegro last month, US Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld clearly stated that his country supports Montenegro's bid to join NATO and other international institutions. Montenegro is a small independent country at a historical moment, and the decisions that it makes now will impact its future, Rumsfeld said. 
A key step along the road to membership is entry into the Partnership for Peace (PfP), a programme of co-operation with 23 non-NATO countries. It imposes significant obligations, with the goal of increasing stability, diminishing threats to peace and building a strengthened security relationship. 
Partner countries commit themselves to transparency of defence planning and allocation of budgetary resources, democratic control over the armed forces, and development and maintenance of the ability to participate in peace operations. 
Within weeks of gaining independence, Montenegro adopted a National Security Strategy and established a defence ministry, showing its determination to enter the PfP. Meanwhile, legislative activity is under way to reform the defence and security sectors. The new, downsized Montenegrin Army will likely be based on land troops, while the police are in charge of maintaining the borders. 
By gaining independence, Montenegro also freed itself from one of the main obstacles that hindered the former Serbia-Montenegro state union's progress towards accession: the issue of co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. Montenegro has no unresolved issues with the tribunal. Its main challenges now are continued reforms, especially as regards the legal system. 
While in Podgorica, Rumsfeld identified two specific areas of bilateral co-operation -- peaceful and special operations. He also offered US support in destroying outdated and dangerous weapons that remain in Montenegro. 
Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic, meanwhile, said his country is ready to accept all responsibilities that come with European and Euro-Atlantic integration. It is also ready to be a part of the coalition headed by the United States, he added in response to a reporter's question about possible participation in the missions in Afghanistan and Iraq. 
The country's defence system already has a unit for special operations, Djukanovic noted, and the future army will be founded in co-ordination with the principles prescribed by Euro-Atlantic integration, taking into account its structural needs. He also suggested that Montenegro sign a Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) with the United States. This is an agreement between a country and foreign military forces in that country, clarifying the terms under which the foreign military is allowed to operate. 
