24/05/2011
By Linda Karadaku and Muharrem Nitaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 24/05/11
The 2010 US State Department Human Rights report on Kosovo notes problems and abuses, including government interference in security and the judiciary, lengthy pretrial detentions, a lack of judicial process and intimidation of the media by public officials and individuals. 
Kosovo officials pledge to address the problems outlined in the report. 
"We take the US State Department Human Rights report seriously, especially the fight against corruption, as well as [judicial] independence, media freedom, and the rights of women, children and the disabled," Qendrim Gashi, adviser to President Atifete Jahjaga, told SETimes. 
The report also cites incidents of violence against members of religious communities and damage to religious properties, limited progress in returning internally displaced persons to their homes, and government corruption, including in the police force and judiciary. 
Other problems relate to violence and discrimination against women, human trafficking -- especially sex trafficking of girls and women -- along with societal violence, abuse, and discrimination against minority communities, those with disabilities, abuse and discrimination based on sexual orientation, and child labour. 
Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi welcomed the report, calling it "realistic and in accordance with the existing situation". 
"This report ranks Kosovo along with other Western Balkans countries as a transit country for narcotics trafficking, positively evaluating efforts by Kosovo police in the fight against narcotics trafficking ... emphasising the need to increase Kosovo police investigations," Rexhepi told SETimes. 
His ministry intends to review the national strategy on narcotics, focusing on demand for drugs, drug use prevention, and treatment for drug users. 
"Fighting organised crime generally and narcotics specifically requires close international and regional co-operation. In this regard, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Kosovo police are important partners in various projects. The ministry remains dedicated to implementing all objectives and activities in the prevention and fight against narcotics trafficking," Rexhepi told SETimes. 
Agron Bajrami, analyst and editor-in-chief of the daily Koha Ditore, says international reports continuously identify problems related to the function of the state and its institutions, and respect for human rights. 
"The biggest problems result from a governing shortage and lack of efficient institutions. Corruption, rule of law, respect for human rights, media and freedom of expression are just some of Kosovo's overall problems. Addressing shortages and problems successfully is impossible without a basic change in the mindset of governance and a reform of the institutional and political structure," Bajrami told SETimes. 
