21/01/2010
By Brian Salmi for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 21/01/10
Opposition politicians in Montenegro have long cried foul over the country's elections, calling them illegal, undemocratic and influenced by organised crime. In protest, three of the largest opposition parties announced they would not field candidates in a December 6th municipal vote in Mojkovac. 
Taking advantage of this, the Socialist People's Party decided to run after indicating they would join the boycott. It took 13 out of 31 seats, with the rest going to the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS). Turnout was 70%. 
The move further highlights the woes plaguing opposition parties. According to University of Montenegro political science professor Milo Becic, the parties are both under-funded and frustrated at their inability to effectively challenge the DPS. 
The opposition decided to boycott municipal polls -- after threatening to stay away from parliament -- when general elections on March 29th proved fruitless, Becic said. . 
"They tried [boycotting parliament] three times before and nobody cared. And they have no legitimacy with the people to try it again, so they came up with [the municipal election boycott]," Becic said. "And then they changed their minds and squabbled amongst themselves." 
He says the real reason is that opposition parties are so frustrated with their inability to challenge the DPS they have given up."They have no desire to run in the game," he said. "They have no money; they have no interest in participating." 
SNP leader Srdjan Milic has said his party will participate in a municipal vote in Cetinje, which, now scheduled for February 7th because of administrative errors. Other opposition parties say they will continue their boycott, despite criticism and even ridicule in the local media. 
Efforts to create a united front to take on the DPS have gone nowhere. One of the boycotting parties, the Movement for Change (PfP), tried to spearhead an alliance in November, hoping to galvanise political parties, activists, intellectuals and NGO leaders under a common banner. 
The initiative foundered when other parties declined to sign on. 
