05/09/2006
(Human Rights Watch, FT - 05/09/06; DPA - 04/09/06)
Despite some positive steps in recent years, Croatia must do much more to ensure that the human rights of Serb refugees returning to the country are fully respected, Human Rights Watch (HRW) said in a report released on Tuesday (5 September). 
Voicing concern about Croatia's failure to resolve problems the returning ethnic Serbs continue to face in a number of areas, including housing, security and employment, the New York-based group urged the EU to press Zagreb to address the outstanding issues. 
"Serb returnees in Croatia still live a precarious existence," an HRW statement Tuesday quoted the watchdog's Europe and Central Asia Director Holly Cartner as saying. "The Croatian government needs to get more serious about improving life for this community if it expects progress on EU membership." 
Croatia began its EU accession talks in October and is widely expected to join the Union in 2010. Any country hoping to join the bloc must first meet a set of economic and political criteria, including respect for human rights and the rights of minorities. 
Up to 350,000 ethnic Serbs fled Croatia during the 1991-1995 conflict in the country. Of them, around 120,000 have returned, including a total of some 17,000 in 2004 and 2005, according to government figures. HRW however believes no more than 65 per cent of the registered returnees live permanently in the country. 
The process of return has significantly slowed in recent years and surveys suggest that no more than 25,000 Serb refugees are still willing to return to Croatia. Therefore, it is now key that authorities focus on improving the human rights situation of those who have already returned, the authors of the 43-page report stress, noting that the preconditions for reintegration are the same as those for fostering returns. 
"Croatia's failure to address housing rights stripped in the war sends a message that Serbs are second-class citizens," said Cartner. "Finding a solution would signal an important shift in Croatia's attitude towards its Serb population." 
Expressing concern about the increased incidence of ethnically motivated violence and harassment against members of the community, HRW criticised the authorities for their failure to consistently and unequivocally condemn such acts. 
The report -- the group's third on the return of Serb refugees to Croatia -- also noted concern over the community's "continuing under-representation" in the judiciary, state and local government institutions. 
In addition, the HRW called on authorities to speed up the processes of restoring electricity to Serb returnee communities and of repairing and rebuilding Serb houses damaged or destroyed during the war, as well as to ensure that the members of that community have full access to their agricultural land. 
