27/08/2008
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 27/08/08
Macedonian firefighters are battling numerous forest fires that sprang up in the past week because of high temperatures and dry conditions. The biggest is on Mount Belasica near Strumitsa. Firefighters there have been trying to gain control of the flames for more than ten days. 
So far, approximately 1,000ha of forest on Mount Belasica have burned. In addition to the firefighting brigade, the army has been called in. Fires are also raging in other parts of the country -- including near Bitola, Kicevo, Krusevo, Kumanovo, Radovish, Tetovo and the villages of Kuckovo and Radusha. Nationwide, according to the government, fires have destroyed 2,622ha of forest. 
According to the Centre for Crisis Management, fires around Tetovo are under control as of Tuesday (August 26th). But a fire in the Poreche region, where the municipality of Makedonski Brod is located, has spread and now laps at the border of Jasen National Park. Over 1,000ha have burned in this region, and the army has activated around 200 soldiers in a bid to bring it under control. 
On Mount Kajmakchalan in the region of Bitola, meanwhile, a fire that originated in neighbouring Greece is still active. To make matters worse, parts of the area are all but inaccessible. 
The situation led the government to reimpose a ban on public entry into forests, initially announced in July and subsequently lifted. Now in effect again, the restriction means anyone entering forest land must have a special permit from the ministry. 
Meanwhile, the interior ministry says prosecutors are filing three cases against alleged arsonists. It disclosed no names, though. 
Some are accusing the authorities of rejecting possible firefighting assistance from Greece on political grounds. According to the Macedonian newspaper Spic, the country used firefighting planes supplied by Croatia in 2007. This year, even though the fire on Mount Kajmakchalan originated in Greece, Macedonia has not asked for similar aid from its neighbour. 
Intense fires ravaged Macedonia last year as well. At the time, the government pledged to buy modern firefighting equipment. But a tender for purchasing such equipment failed. According to Shaban Saliu, head of the Office of Protection and Rescue, the sole participating company failed to submit complete documentation. 
