13/04/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 13/04/06
Focusing on the future was one of the main themes at a roundtable discussion on Serbia-Montenegro and Kosovo held on 31 March at the University of Toronto. The event brought together students, analysts and businesspeople to talk about EU accession and other goals, as well as about the challenges that lie ahead. 
The "legacy approach" -- concentrating on the problems inherited from the past -- is not helpful when it comes to policymaking, said Ivan Krastev, research director at the Centre for Liberal Strategies in Sofia and editor-in-chief of the Bulgarian edition of <i>Foreign Policy</i> magazine. The most relevant approach, he said, would be to talk about the region's EU accession goals -- a topic on which that all regional governments as well as opposition parties agree. 
It is important to look at the end game -- EU membership -- and then look back, not the other way around, he added. 
Ivan Vejvoda, a former adviser to the late Serbian Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic, also stressed the importance of looking ahead. The tasks facing the region require going beyond navel-gazing, he said, citing as an example the situation of the Serb minority in Kosovo. Ensuring their rights is an issue that requires realism, he suggested. 
Vejvoda was optimistic about future prospects, predicting that Serbia-Montenegro's EU and NATO accession will speed up once the key requirement of co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal is met, and once the two outstanding political issues of the moment -- Kosovo's status and the future of the Serbia-Montenegro state union -- are resolved. 
Risk-adverse investors are waiting to do business in the region once it can prove its stability, Vejvoda added. 
The Montenegrin independence referendum, set for 22 May, was an important topic on the roundtable agenda. Montenegrin Independent News Agency General Manager Jasa Jovicevic recapped the political situation in Montenegro over the past 15 years, highlighting the referendum campaign. He also discussed the problems that could arise if the vote falls in the "grey zone" -- that is, if the "yes" vote for independence wins a majority short of the required 55 per cent threshold. 
Jovicevic and Krastev both argued in favour of Montenegrin independence, on the grounds that the state union is "dysfunctional" and that the two republic's economies are fundamentally different -- Serbia's being industry-based, and Montenegro's driven by tourism and services. The EU recognises this through the "two-track" negotiations process, Krastev said, but this kind of ambiguous approach cannot work indefinitely. The bottom line is that there needs to be a long-term solution acceptable to the majority, he said. 
The roundtable was organised by the Munk Centre for International Studies. 
