12/05/2009
By Ilija Djordjevic for Southeast European Times in Mitrovica -- 12/05/09 
Over two weeks of protests by Serbs in the Brdjani neighborhood -- one of the three ethnically divided areas of Mitrovica -- apparently have come to an end. 
As reported by Belgrade's B92 on Monday (May 11th), local Serbs reached an agreement with UNMIK. According to Nebojsa Minic of Mitrovica's Serb community, international representatives agreed to stop "tolerat[ing] the projects of the southern municipality [of Mitrovica] and … they will not realise the south municipality's projects in the northern part without approval from Serb local institutions". 
Minic said the Serbs met with UNMIK officials "and thus indirectly" with EULEX, an important point of protocol for Serbs who reject EULEX authority in northern Kosovo. He said the deal means that nothing can be built in the contested area without Serb approval. 
The Serbs had been protesting for over two weeks the renovation of five Albanian houses on the so-called "yellow line", which has separated the two ethnic communities since 2000. 
The Serbs, in demanding the return of Serbian refugees to Kosovo before displaced Kosovo Albanians return, cited an agreement reached in 2000. According to them, the deal stipulated the withdrawal of a number of KFOR troops and no rebuilding on the yellow line without the Serbs' consent.
EULEX police repeatedly used tear gas and stun grenades to disperse the protesters who broke through the Kosovo Police Force (KPS) cordon. A EULEX press statement explained that EULEX, the KPS and KFOR acted jointly to maintain public order and prevent further violent escalations. 
Such action, however, aroused the ire of local Serbs. Minic, a Brdjani resident, told a local radio station that "EULEX and KFOR openly side with the Albanians, maintaining a double standard." 
"We are pressed from all sides," said another, Dragan Maric. 
According to fellow resident Dragoslav Zivkovic, meanwhile, the house renovations were designed "for maximum marketing, and not so much for any social purpose". 
EU mission chief Yves de Kermabon, however, says it is the Serb demonstrators who are looking to stir up "provocation and conflict". In an interview for Caglavica Radio KiM, he said "it is time for the Serbs and Albanians to return to their homes". 
