21/05/2012
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 21/05/12 
Serbian Progressive Party leader Tomislav Nikolic was elected as the new president of Serbia on Sunday (May 20th), after he managed to beat Democratic Party candidate Boris Tadic, who had defeated him in the 2004 and 2008 elections and had two presidential mandates. 
Nikolic's triumph was unexpected as certain polling agencies gave Tadic a whopping 16% lead ahead of round two. However, in the end, according to unofficial data, Nikolic scored a 2% advantage over Tadic, amid a record low turnout of 46.3%. 
Nikolic's victory has raised numerous questions -- primarily whether Serbia will continue down the European accession path, and whether the Democrats and the parties that were their allies in the previous government will form the new one, as agreed immediately after the May 6th general elections. 
The Serbian president does not have much constitutional authority, since the economy and foreign policy are managed by the government, but many analysts assessed the Progressive Party leader's triumph as "a political earthquake." 
Belgrade Faculty of Philosophy professor Slobodan Antonic said that "all options are open" for the government’s formation now. 
"A symbolic change has occurred, similar to the instance when Slobodan Milosevic lost the presidential election [in September 2000], despite his Socialist Party of Serbia having the majority," Antonic told SETimes. 
However, in his first reaction Sunday, Nikolic said his policy would not be dramatically different from the one he had been leading so far, i.e. that European integration is the priority. 
"Serbia will not veer off the European road. I want to protect the Serb people in Kosovo and Metohija. This election was not a referendum on who will run Serbia and who will not, rather the internal problems created by the Democratic Party and Boris Tadic were being solved," Nikolic said. 
He also said he would have good relations with the presidents of all states in the region and announced visits to Moscow, Brussels and Washington. "I will have good relations with Republika Srpska President Milorad Dodik and other presidents of states in the region, because relations with the people leading states and peoples are not built on personal preferences." 
Tadic quickly admitted defeat. "I congratulate Mr. Nikolic on a fair and deserved victory and wish him luck in carrying out that difficult duty," Tadic said. 
Prior to Sunday's vote, Tadic's Democrats forged a coalition with the Socialist Party of Serbia and should not have much trouble forming the new government. However, Nikolic has been accusing the Democrats of serious election fraud. Those allegations and Nikolic's victory now open the issue of a new general election in Serbia. 
"Anything is possible now, because the voters have chosen to punish Tadic for their frustrations. The fact that Tadic has suffered the brunt of the blow is the consequence of the extremely difficult economic and social situation in Serbia," Ognjen Pribicevic, former Serbian ambassador to Germany, told SETimes. 
Although Nikolic has announced he will not drastically change policy, there have been negative reactions to his election from Kosovo. 
Head of the European Movement in Kosovo Behlul Beqaj told SETimes that Nikolic's victory represents the end of the European misapprehension that Serbia had broken away from its past nationalist policy. 
"This victory is, in fact, a consequence of hitherto improvisations made legitimate at the highest international levels, regarding alleged reforms and Serbia's European orientation, even though the real state of things is that Serbia is under heavy pressure from its political past," Beqaj said. 
