17/06/2011
By Ozgur Ogret for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 17/06/11
Kenan Evren and Tahsin Sahinkaya, the last remaining members of the junta that carried out the September 12th 1980 military coup, were questioned by prosecutors last week after both lost their immunity following the referendum that approved changes to the constitution on September 12th last year. 
Evren, the leader of the coup and the Republic's seventh president, and Sahinkaya were required to testify to Huseyin Gorusen, Ankara prosecutor with special authority, in an investigation that began in April. 
The passing of the referendum and the symbolism of it taking place on the anniversary of the coup were widely viewed as a demonstration of the ascendency of civilians over the once untouchable military. 
Following the referendum, thousands of people filed criminal charges against the coup and its leaders, who had granted themselves immunity under the 15th Amendment of the constitution. 
The coup remains controversial to this day, with some arguing the military saved the country from a descent into violence and political chaos. Others maintain the overthrowing of the elected government and subsequent restrictions on civil liberties, mass arrests, and political murders amount to a criminal act. 
In their testimony, neither Evren nor Şahinkaya voiced any regrets and claimed they acted for the interests of the country. They argued Turkey was in a state of anarchy and chaos before the coup, as everyday people were being killed in politically inspired street violence. 
According to the two generals, the military acted within its bylaws that authorise them "to watch over and protect the Turkish homeland and the Turkish Republic assigned by the constitution". 
Evren said "If the country was in the same situation and I was in power, I would carry out [the coup] again." 
The process resulted in mixed reactions: Some perceive the investigation as a step forward for democracy, while others argue that even if the case is accepted by the court it would not lead anywhere. Others argue it was a cheap attempt by the government to increase votes before the June 12th general elections. 
Political scientist Baskın Oran, one of many academics banned from scholarship by the junta, told SETimes that he believes the possible trail of the 1980 coup is not only an attempt to remove military tutelage, but also a warning to would-be coup planners. 
"The status of impunity constantly encourages new coups. Why shouldn't they carry out another coup?" he said, adding that although Turkey has escaped the possibility of a coup for the foreseeable future, those who believe the investigation would do no good are "unaware of what is happening around them". 
Journalist Necati Dogru, columnist for the daily Sozcu, however, has his doubts about the investigation. "I am also happy that the coup tradition in Turkey is being tackled, I see it as a democratic step, but doing it now is not sincere at all," he told SETimes. 
"It is not a sincere act to arrange this during the general election and say 'we are calling the putschists to account.'" 
Celalettin Can is a spokesperson for the leftist 78ers Movement. "Even if the government has done this as an election maneuovre, I believe it is meaningful that a couple of questions were asked to Evren and Sahinkaya in a country like Turkey, where the military is identified as being one with the state, where everything starts and ends with the state," he told SETimes. 
According the Can, the investigation would "open some doors, start some discussions." He said the 78ers Movement intends to see the military cabinet, martial law commanders, police chiefs, intelligence operatives, prison wardens and torturers investigated and brought to trial. 
"The matter is not these people be thrown in prison. We have this issue of facing history, creating the conditions that such things will never be experienced again," he said. 
