13/02/2007
(EurActiv - 13/02/07; Reuters, AP, RFE/RL, Makfax, Xinhua - 12/02/07)
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari received strong backing from the EU on Monday (February 12th) for his proposed settlement to Kosovo's status issue. 
"The proposals create the basis for Kosovo's sustainable economic and political development and for strengthening the stability of the entire region," EU foreign ministers said in a statement following a meeting in Brussels. 
After nine months of largely inconclusive talks between Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials last year, Ahtisaari presented his proposal during visits to Belgrade and Pristina on February 2nd. While allowing Kosovo to adopt a constitution and national symbols, such as a flag and an anthem, within the framework of internationally supervised self-rule, the blueprint also offers broad autonomy for the province's Serb minority. 
Voicing their "full support" for the former Finnish president and his efforts in the process to determine Kosovo's final status, the EU foreign ministers welcomed Ahtisaari's intention to engage Serbian and Kosovo Albanian negotiators in intensive consultations on his plan. 
In their conclusions from Monday's meeting, the bloc's top diplomats "urged Belgrade and Pristina to participate actively and constructively in these consultations", which are scheduled to begin in Vienna on February 21st. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, who attended the meeting, also took the opportunity to condemn the violence that broke out during a weekend pro-independence protest in Kosovo. 
Unhappy with the fact that the Ahtisaari plan does not mention outright independence for Kosovo, an ethnic Albanian political movement organised a rally that ended in clashes with police and the deaths of two demonstrators. Kosovo Interior Minister Fatmir Rexhepi has resigned over the incident. 
"There is no place in Kosovo for violence to achieve political objectives," the AP quoted Rehn as saying Monday. "Those who resort to it only damage their own cause." 
