21/06/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 21/06/04
Though Banja Luka district court judges have indefinitely adjourned hearings on the first-ever war crimes case prosecuted in Republika Srpska (RS) -- against 11 former Prijedor police officers for illegally detaining a Catholic priest during the war -- Banja Luka district prosecutor Vitomir Soldat said his office expects more work of this type. That is why he attended a training programme organised by the American Bar Association's Central European and Eurasian Law Initiative (ABA-CEELI).
"We're expecting a large number of cases from The Hague," said Soldat, referring to the so-called Rules of the Road cases, in which The Hague war crimes tribunal approves evidence gathered by local prosecutors before the prosecutors can issue warrants and prosecute cases.
Such cases, and co-operation with the tribunal, were the main points of the recent two-day training in Banja Luka for about two dozen RS prosecutors, judges and defence lawyers.
Because the tribunal will be finishing trials by 2008 and appeals by 2010, and because Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) state-level war crimes chamber that should begin work in 2005 will be able to handle between 50 and 100 cases in five years, entity courts should ideally be vigorously prosecuting Rules of the Road cases sent back from The Hague. RS, however, is notorious for foot-dragging. Most outside the entity point to the lack of will to prosecute, given that courts in the Federation of BiH have prosecuted about 100 of these cases.
Judges and lawyers here cite all sorts of reasons for avoiding the cases. One of these is that investigations and witness protection would cost money the court system doesn't have. Another is that the new criminal codes imposed in the entity last August borrow heavily from the unfamiliar, adversarial Anglo-American legal system.
"Now we have to change our habits and get used to the new roles of the judges, prosecutors and lawyers," said RS Supreme Court President Zelimir Baric.
Others raised the question of jurisdiction, because the RS code doesn't have war crimes or crimes against humanity provisions.
Jonathan Schmidt is an American prosecutor at BiH's State Court who helped out with the training. He says the crimes could be prosecuted either under the regular criminal code, or under the former Yugoslav Republic of BiH codes that were technically in effect during the 1992-1995 war. He also noted that it's a prosecutor's job to make the best possible case for jurisdiction, instead of doing nothing out for fear of being rejected.
Whether the RS courts start prosecuting these cases is up to the prosecutors. "Our task is to promote the rule of law and to teach the law. We're not here to pass judgement or to point fingers," said ABA-CEELI criminal law liaison Maureen O'Connor. "We can't actually make them use the tools and the knowledge from the seminar -- it's up to them to prosecute and investigate these cases."
