04/02/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 04/02/09
Romania's new interior minister, Liviu Dragnea, resigned on Monday (February 2nd) after holding the post for only 12 days. He had replaced Gabriel Oprea, who stepped down after 21 days in office. 
At a hastily called press conference, Dragnea said he wished to avoid "tensions within the coalition". He also cited a lack of funds, saying it would prevent him from achieving the bold objectives he had set when he took over the ministry. 
"Maybe I will return if the political reality becomes different," he added. 
 According to media reports, Dragnea made his decision after three nominations he made were rejected both by his own Social Democratic Party (PSD) and its coalition partner, the Liberal Democrats. The nominations were for state secretary, first deputy minister, and head of the General Directorate of Information and Internal Protection (DGIPI). 
"When I accepted the minister mandate, I assumed very clear objectives … and will not accept stalling on what I promised," he told reporters. 
The DGIPI was also at the root of the scandal that led to Oprea's mid-January resignation. The former minister had named a controversial figure, Virgil Ardelean, to head the secret service, which both parties in the coalition would like to control. 
Dragnea submitted his nominations for the positions up to a week ago, but Prime Minister Emil Boc refused to sign them, and President Traian Basescu also reportedly expressed opposition. The nominees purportedly represented different interest groups within the PSD, a fact that irritated the Liberal Democrats. Unable to please both sides, Dragnea had little choice but to resign. 
The coalition partners are also at odds over several other high-level government appointments, as well as over a corruption case brought against former Prime Minister Adrian Nastase. 
The PSD convened on Tuesday evening and decided to appoint Dan Nica, vice president of the party, to fill the interior ministry vacancy. Nica had previously served as interim interior minister after Oprea resigned. 
Dragnea, meanwhile, will return to the Teleorman County Council, which he will lead for a third term. 
The turmoil at the interior ministry comes amid a fierce public debate over the legal system, sparked by a double murder during a robbery in Brasov. The main suspect, a Moldovan citizen, received a prison furlough for minor eye surgery and never returned to finish his sentence. 
At least 100 other dangerous convicts are thought to be at large, thanks to a lax judicial system. The Brasov case has dealt a heavy blow to the system's reputation, ahead of a preliminary European Commission report on the judiciary set for publication later this month. 
