10/04/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 10/04/08
The US Office in Pristina officially became the United States Embassy in Kosovo on Tuesday (April 8th). The United States joins Great Britain, Germany, Albania, and Switzerland in opening embassies in Kosovo since the former province declared independence from Serbia on February 17th. 
 "As a consequence of Kosovo's new status as an independent country, recognised by many of the world's most powerful and prosperous nations, we have now been granted permission by the US Congress to open formally as a full-fledged US Embassy," Chargé d'Affaires Tina Kaidanow said. 
The first US mission in Kosovo was established on July 6th 1996 and has played a significant role in important decisions. 
 "While the US Office in Pristina has operated for many years with all the responsibilities and tasks of a busy diplomatic mission, the designation as an embassy reflects a new phase in our development and underscores our deep and lasting commitment to work on the progress of Kosovo and all its people," Kaidanow said. 
 "Every day, we engage in efforts aimed at improving the lives of ordinary people in Kosovo and addressing the needs of Kosovo's many diverse ethnic communities," she added. 
 The US mission has worked to improve Kosovo's economic performance, to develop its democratic institutions, to celebrate its diverse cultural and ethnic heritage, and to ensure full rights for all ethnic communities. "We have developed contacts with a huge range of people from every background and every political orientation, and we value the insights and opinions they provide," said Kaidanow. 
 Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, who attended Tuesday's ceremony, paraphrased late President Ibrahim Rugova, who lauded the friendship between Kosovo and the United States. "The United States is our friend, and we will co-operate closely." 
Sejdiu said the embassy opening was only one part of establishing the diplomatic relationship. The second part comes when Kosovo opens its embassy in Washington. 
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci echoed those sentiments, saying the opening was about more than a change of status. "Empowering this office with the status of embassy says to the world that the United States has faith in Kosovo. And we as a people are humbled and honoured." 
 "As Kosovo continues on its journey among the free and democratic nations of the world, we will always have a special place in our heart for the people of the United States of America," Thaci added. 
