17/02/2009
(CNA, AFP, Famagusta Gazette, Financial Mirror, Hurriyet - 16/02/09; Reuters, AP, Cyprus Mail, Financial Mirror - 13/02/09)
The UN special envoy for Cyprus appeared confident Monday (February 16th) that Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and his Turkish Cypriot counterpart, Mehmet Ali Talat, can bring the talks on reuniting the Mediterranean island to a successful end. The two leaders remain as committed as ever to reaching a deal, former Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said, cautioning, however, that this may take time. 
"There has never been a moment's hesitation in terms of the commitment of the two leaders in Cyprus to succeed," the UN envoy said after a meeting with Christofias. "If you have leaders determined to succeed, they can succeed." 
A new round of direct peace talks between the leaders of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities officially began in early September, more than four years after the latest, UN-sponsored effort to reach a settlement ended in failure in April 2004. Hopes have run high that, this time around, a deal to end Cyprus's 34-year ethnic division will surface. 
Christofias and Talat have been meeting weekly since September, but progress has been slow. They met again last Thursday to present their stances on the criteria for resolving the property issue -- one of the thorniest on the agenda, including security, territory and the fate of Turkish settlers. They will talk again this Thursday. 
Christofias told reporters that "serious differences" exist on the property issue. He appeared more optimistic after the talks with Talat but would not support statements coming from the Turkish Cypriot side that an agreement can emerge by autumn. "We cannot press the situation based on what anyone has on his mind ... Let things work," Christofias said on Thursday. 
Downer also called for more patience Monday, stressing that the two leaders need enough time to deal with such a complicated matter. 
 But the strong involvement of the international community boosts his optimism about prospects for a deal. 
"There is so much support for the leaders coming not just from the UN but more generally from the EU of course, from major powers like Russia, the United States, Britain and China and France," the AFP quoted Downer as saying. "It's very encouraging." 
Visiting Cyprus on Friday, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn praised Christofias and Talat and conveyed the 27-nation's bloc readiness to give the two leaders any necessary legal and technical assistance. 
''There is a unique chance this year to reunite Cyprus and bring to an end this longstanding conflict on European soil,'' Rehn said in Nicosia, adding that ''this chance must be taken and not missed''. 
