12/09/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 12/09/11
Belgrade and Pristina struck a deal earlier this month on the volatile issue of Kosovo's customs stamp but implementation remains questionable. 
After talks on the stamp were cancelled on July 20th, Kosovo authorities attempted to take over crossings to Serbia in Serb dominated northern Kosovo. Clashes between Kosovo police and local Serbs left one Kosovo police officer dead. 
In retaliation, Kosovo banned Serbian imports, costing the country an estimated 45m euros since late July. The recent agreement on the stamp is expected to somewhat improve relations. Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi talked about the situation with SETimes correspondent Muhamet Brajshori. 
SETimes: What is the current security situation in the north after the Customs Agreement with Belgrade? 
Bajram Rexhepi: In general the situation is under control, but time to time there are tensions, the barricades issues, different illegal groups which are a security concern. There are persons of Serbian Interior Ministry, [and] we have information that there are members of the Serbian Intelligence Agency as well. I can say that the situation is under control but remains fragile. 
SETimes: When will Kosovo Police and Customs officers take control of Gate 1 and 31? How will this change be explained in the ongoing discussions with Belgrade, and how much of an issue do you believe it will be? 
Rexhepi: Really, for the moment these (Gates 1 and 31) are defined as military zones and are protected by KFOR. You know that immediately after the action [came] the agreement, the border police are only now in Brnjak, while in Jarinje is KFOR, according to the 11-point compliance which is [in effect] until September 15th. General [Erhard] Buhler has said it might be continued if the situation requires it. 
The status of these two points is restricted military zone … and, once favourable conditions are created, we will repair Gate 1 in Jarinje starting with deploying containers, cabins, connection of IT and then we will send police and officers to the Kosovo border there. While EULEX police and customs officers can give advice and support in this process, KFOR will take care [of] safety. 
SETimes: General Buhler has mentioned that organised crime in the north is multi-ethnic. What is your personal and professional opinion? 
 Rexhepi: In reality, not only in the north but in the whole territory of Kosovo, organised crime is multiethnic and criminals have an ideal -- to have money -- and do not care about anything else. 
Sadly, this is unfortunately also in the North where criminals have connections with other parts in Kosovo, but given that most of the oil derivatives that are smuggled, have not only the North as the destination but also other parts of Kosovo. So customers are also other citizens of Kosovo and we make no distinction in the investigations, whether anyone is Serbian or Albanian. We are interested [in stopping] all criminals regardless of ethnicity and to break up organised crime. 
SETimes: Why doesn't Kosovo have an anti-mafia/anti organised-crime law? 
Rexhepi: Whether it will be called anti-mafia law or something else is an technical issue. In Albania it is called the Anti-Mafia law, because you cannot only fight crime with the arrest and serving prison. In these cases must be complete confiscation of property, [which] can deliver results, to discourage criminals. 
If property is acquired without justifiable [means], then the state can confiscate all this wealth. According to the penal code there is the possibility of managing the property, however we wanted a special law to be implemented more precisely. It is through the [government] procedure and is [awaiting] a vote in parliament. 
SETimes: What is the current state of the visa liberalisation process? What have you done to fulfill the criteria? 
 Rexhepi: [This week], between September 12th-19th, we will have an evaluation commission in Kosovo from the EU, to see how much we have achieved with the repatriation and reintegration of readmitted persons. 
A recent letter [from] EU Commissioner for Home Affairs Cecilia Malstrom is very positive, and as a result of this, I expect the dialogue on visa liberalisation to commence within this year. We have an official guide or complementary strategy so that necessary conditions for liberalisation can be met as soon as possible and Kosovo will not to remain an isolated country. 
SETimes: The opposition movement Vetevendosje (Self-Determination) has accused the police of using violence against them when they were arrested at the airport. Is violence being used by Kosovo Police a procedure, and what has your ministry done to either prevent or condone this activity? 
Rexhepi: In reality, Vetvendosje has been violent, you know the various forms, and violence does not mean only firing guns but also attacking with stones and plundering property. I know their last act [lobbing tomatoes at Kosovo negotiations chief EditaTahiri] was more symbolic. [But] the Vetvendosje are usually very aggressive and as a result, violence is used by police proportionately. 
After each action, professional standards require the police to assess whether they used excessive or proportional force. If by chance anyone has any objections, they may initiate the case with the police inspectorate. 
But based on images and information we have it indicate that the police had acted as it is with standards and I stand behind my stance. A minority [Vetvendosje] cannot impose on the majority and this will not happen. 
