15/03/2006
(Hurriyet, Kathimerini - 15/03/06; AP, Reuters, BBC, Xinhua, Macedonian Press Agency, Sofia News Agency, NTV MSNBC, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 14/03/06)
Bulgaria declared a state of emergency in 15 central and southern districts and closed its border with Turkey on Tuesday (14 March) as the swollen Maritsa River flooded the highway leading to the Kapitan Andreevo border checkpoint. Thousands of homes have been flooded and more than 100 villages and towns are without electricity. 
The worst affected areas are along the Maritsa and the Arda rivers in southern Bulgaria, but problems also occurred in the northwestern part of the country, where the Danube River rose by more than a metre in just 24 hours, reaching 6.98 meters at the town of Lom. 
Rail service between Sofia and Bulgaria's second largest city, Plovdiv, was also temporarily disrupted by the floods, which have also triggered a number of landslides across the country. 
The Maritsa River also flows through Turkey and Greece, where it is known as the Meric River and Evros River, respectively. It forms the border between the two countries. 
On Tuesday, the Greek government declared a state of emergency in the northeastern prefecture of Evros, bordering Bulgaria to the north and Turkey to the east, after the Evros rose to dangerously high levels. 
"We are on high alert," the Greek daily Kathimerini quoted Evros Deputy Prefect Michalis Kogioumtzis as telling the Athens News Agency on Tuesday. The small town of Lavara, where people from 72 flooded homes were evacuated, is said to be the worst affected area. 
The Turkish city of Edirne, on the country's border with Bulgaria, has also battling floods. Local authorities say Bulgaria allowed dangerous amounts of water through the floodgates of dams on the Arda. 
"Edirne's Merich River normally has a flow of 500 cubic metres of water, but after the opening of dams on the Bulgarian Arda River, this flow increased to 1,800 cubic metres, which in turn opened the way to a natural disaster in the city," the Turkish daily Hurriyet reported on Wednesday. Ankara has reportedly urged Bulgarian authorities close the dams immediately. 
Greece is also blaming floods in its Evros prefecture, said to be the worst in the last 15 years, on inadequate crisis management. "The water is coming our way in an uncontrolled manner," the AP quoted Greek Interior Minister Prokopis Pavlopoulos as saying Tuesday. 
Bulgaria's political opposition, meanwhile, is lashing out at the government. On Tuesday, the right-wing Democrats for Strong Bulgaria called for the resignation of Minister of Disaster Management Emel Etem.
