08/11/2007
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 08/11/07
Following the Romanian government's adoption of measures on Monday (November 5th) aimed at co-operating with Italian authorities and protecting Romanians living legally in Italy, the prime ministers of both countries met for talks on Wednesday. Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu traveled to Rome to discuss the situation with his Italian counterpart, Romano Prodi. 
The measures followed last week's murder of an Italian woman, allegedly by a Romanian national. The crime sparked an outbreak of violence against Romanians, and Italy promptly moved to deport Romanians with criminal records. 
Tariceanu said his visit was meant to find concrete solutions -- applied jointly -- to prevent crimes, such as the one last week, which can affect ties between the two countries. He urged the media to help emphasise the importance of bilateral relations. 
During Wednesday's meeting, Tariceanu and Prodi agreed on a package of measures meant to control immigration, protect Romanian workers in Italy and avoid incidents. 
They agreed to set up an Italian-Romanian security task force that will include 30 Romanian police officers, who can help identify Romanian nationals with criminal records. Romania will also send a series of magistrates to Italy to provide judicial assistance to immigrants. 
Tariceanu pledged that consular activity in Italy will increase, since consulates are too understaffed to cope with Romanian nationals' needs. 
"We agreed to intensify our co-operation,'' Prodi said following the meeting. "Our aim is to guarantee the safety of both Romanians and Italians, and to ensure the freedom of movement, which is one of the fundamental freedoms on which the [EU] is built.'' 
"The Roma issues should be a concern for the EU and we expect this move be taken into account at the level of the European Commission (EC) in order to work out policies on a European level, with a stress on education," Tariceanu said. 
In a letter to EC President Jose Manuel Barroso, the two leaders asked the EC to get involved in resolving issues related to underprivileged communities, to craft integration and social policies at the bloc level, and to help members of the Union that face migration tides. 
Tariceanu said Bucharest has decided to establish a working group on Roma issues that will include experts from the ministries of labour, interior and administrative reforms and education. The goal of the group will be to find ways to improve the social integration of the Roma minority. 
Tariceanu also met with Pope Benedict XVI on Wednesday and thanked him for his message of "tolerance and integration". 
