17/04/2008
(AFP, Reuters, AP, DPA, AKI, Balkan Insight, Fena, Office of the High Representative - 16/04/08)
The upper house of Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) state-level parliament adopted two police reform laws Wednesday (April 16th), opening the door for the country's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU. 
The bill on oversight of BiH police and the bill on co-ordination of police departments and support agencies were approved by a 10-4 vote of the 15-member House of Peoples. Approval came about a week after the bills cleared the 42-seat lower house. 
The breakthrough came after more than three years of talks on police re-organisation in the country, where each of its entities -- Republika Srpska (RS) and the Federation of BiH -- has its own police. Attempts to reach a deal were blocked mainly by Bosnian Serb parties fearing that the EU-required police reforms eventually would doom the RS. 
They finally accepted a compromise proposal offered by High Representative Miroslav Lajcak and envisioning the creation of seven state-level co-ordination bodies that will assume authority over the country's ethnically divided police forces within a year after the adoption of constitutional reform. 
Favouring more centralisation of police, the ruling Bosniak Party of Democratic Action and the Serb Democratic Party are criticising the legislation, claiming it offers only "cosmetic" changes that will not improve security in BiH. 
Although the approved plan deviates from the EU's original demand for a single police force nationwide, Brussels signalled that it would accept any deal under which police operate professionally and eschew ethnic bias. 
EU officials praised BiH politicians on Wednesday for removing the final obstacle to the signing of the SAA, a major step towards eventual EU membership. The accord was initialled in December, but Brussels said it would be finalised only after an agreement on police restructuring. 
 EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said on Wednesday that the accord would not only "bring practical benefits in trade" but would also bring BiH closer to candidate status. 
Characterising Wednesday's move as a "decisive step" for BiH, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana voiced hope that the SAA could be signed "soon". 
It could happen as early as April 29th, during a meeting of EU foreign ministers in Luxembourg. 
 "If there are technical difficulties, the next date for the signing will be May 26th," Slovenian Ambassador to BiH Natasa Vodusek, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, said on Wednesday. 
If problems do occur, finalisation could take place during the EU foreign ministers' subsequent meeting on June 16th. 
"Once embarked on this road, no country has failed to become a member of the EU," Lajcak said as he welcomed the police re-organisation, which "sends a strong signal to the EU and to investors that BiH … is open for business". 
