20/12/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 20/12/06
The Macedonian government has lifted five of the seven domestic restrictions affecting the participation of soldiers in the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan. The limits had included prohibitions on sending Macedonian soldiers into certain types of action. 
The precise nature of the restrictions is confidential. However, Defence Minister Laze Elenovski said they related to participation in police activities, staving off crowds and training Afghan forces. The minister, who recently visited soldiers in Kabul, said removing them would improve operability and efficiency, thus making it easier for ISAF to complete its mission. 
"If we are a part of the [NATO] family, we have to feel the responsibilities and obligations. By removing the national restrictions, the efficiency of the Alliance will absolutely increase," Elenovski said. "We will achieve our goals and start withdrawing from Afghanistan sooner and leaving Afghanistan to Afghan democratic authorities." 
Many of the 37 nations contributing forces to ISAF have imposed special rules on how those troops can be used. NATO commanders say they have identified about 50 of these caveats that interfere with troop manoeuvres and effectiveness. 
In some cases, removing caveats is equivalent to multiplying troops, according to Supreme Allied Commander Europe, General James L. Jones. According to him, some 10 to 15 of these restrictions have been modified, increasing flexibility and "effectively adding 2,000 more troops to the mission". 
Similar caveats -- including requirements for approval from host governments and other bureaucratic procedures -- hampered NATO efforts to restore order during the March 2004 riots in Kosovo, Jones said. Countries participating in KFOR have since agreed to more flexibility. 
"We have removed all of the national boundaries. We have now a task force concept where forces can move about the country at the commander's wishes. We are better trained for crowd and riot control, which is the principal threat. We have much better relations with the people of the various communities, " Jones said of the KFOR mission. 
Achieving similar flexibility in Afghanistan was one of the topics discussed at the recent NATO summit in Riga. According to Elenovski, eliminating caveats is one of the steps Macedonia -- which aspires to NATO membership -- can take to improve its standing in the Alliance. 
Macedonia has been part of the Afghanistan peace mission since 2002, as part of the German, British and Greek contingents. Of its 115 soldiers, 90 in a motorised infantry unit are performing protective tasks, while another squad handles medical tasks. 
