31/08/2011
(DPA, AKI, AP, UPI, RFE/RL, VOA, BBC, Beta, B92, Xinhua, UN News Service, UN Security Council - 30/08/11)
Belgrade and Pristina must resolve their open issues through dialogue and refrain from any unilateral actions to prevent an escalation of tensions in the region, UNMIK acting head Farid Zarif said during a Security Council session Tuesday (August 30th) on Kosovo. 
Nearly five weeks after the latest clashes between ethnic Serbs and Albanians in Kosovo's north, the situation remains volatile, he told the key 15-nation UN body. 
On July 25th, the Kosovo government sent armoured units from the ROSU special police force to the country's northern border in an attempt to take control of two crossing points there. In response, local Serbs erected roadblocks to stop them and a fire-fight erupted, in which one Kosovo policeman was killed. KFOR's intervention prevented a further escalation of violence and loss of life. 
Although the situation had improved to a certain extent since, it remained "tense and unpredictable", Zarif said. 
Addressing the Council on Tuesday, he also noted that last month's clashes "were the most serious security incidents since the violence in 2008", when Kosovo declared independence from Serbia, a move still staunchly opposed by both Belgrade and the majority of Kosovo Serbs. 
"They serve as a stark reminder that the issues underlying these incidents remain unresolved and constitute a serious threat to Kosovo's peace and security," Zarif stressed. "It remains essential therefore that all sides refrain from any unilateral action, which could escalate tensions." 
The recent violence, he added, should serve as "a wake-up call" for all concerned that "rebuilding trust and promoting inter-community co-operation and understanding cannot be further postponed". 
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic, who also addressed the Council, reiterated that his country would never recognise Kosovo's independence. He also made clear that Serbia is not planning to abolish the Belgrade-funded parallel structures and institutions in northern Kosovo, despite Western countries' repeated calls for this and warnings that this may hurt the country's EU bid. 
Kosovo Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj, who only had a name plate in front of him, but no "national symbols", according to Serbian news agency Tanjug, stressed that the purpose of sending the ROSU force to the country's north last month was not to disturb or attack citizens. 
"We simply wanted to reinforce measures of reciprocity in trade when all attempts to negotiate the matter had failed," he noted. 
It was not the Kosovo police, but the Serbian government that "committed acts of violence" on his country's territory, Hoxhaj added. Stressing that Belgrade has no legal right to finance and support its own armed paramilitary, security, intelligence and other institutions inside Kosovo, he called for the dissolution of such illegal parallel structures. 
