31/08/2005
(OHR Morning Brief - 31/08/05; Reuters, FENA, SEE Security Monitor - 30/08/05; NATO HQ in Sarajevo)
The Republika Srpska National Assembly (RSNA) approved a decision Tuesday (30 August) setting the stage for the creation of a single professional army in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
Defence reform, which the RS lawmakers blocked back in March, is a critical requirement for BiH's admission to NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme. 
"This is a painful reform, this is a change of perception but it is certainly a contribution to the future," Bosnian Serb President Dragan Cavic said Tuesday, appealing to MPs to support the plan. 
Eventually, 61 deputies in the 83-seat assembly supported the proposed constitutional change. Ten voted against, while three others abstained. A coalition of minor parties left the session in protest, according to Reuters. 
The country's other entity, the Federation of BiH (FBiH), is expected to easily pass a similar measure next week, after which the legislation will be put to the vote in the BiH Parliament. 
Accepting the defence reform will establish the Armed Forces of BiH (AFBiH) as "a source of stability and confidence for the population rather than of mistrust and concern," said the outgoing commander of NATO's headquarters in Sarajevo, Brigadier General Steven Schook. By supporting the plan the country would embrace a "unique opportunity and make a great step" towards Euro-Atlantic integration. After this, full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague would be the last remaining obstacle to membership in the PfP programme, Schook said Tuesday. 
The defence reform envisions the abolition of the RS and FBiH defence ministries and army commands as of 1 January 2006 and the transfer of their functions to the BiH Defence Ministry and general headquarters, which were set up last year. 
A single chain of command will be established, running from the BiH presidency to the defence minister, to the chief of the joint staff, to the commander of the operational command and commander of support command, and through them to their subordinate elements. 
There will a single defence budget at the state level as of 1 January. 
Under the plan, the AFBiH will be comprised exclusively of professional personnel. Conscription will be abolished as of 1 January. Consisting of as many as 10,000 troops, the AFBiH will belong to and reflect BiH's composition as a state with three main ethnic groups. The joint army will be made up of three manoeuvre brigades, each consisting of a Bosnian Muslim, a Bosnian Serb and a Bosnian Croat battalion, based in Tuzla, Mostar and Banja Luka, according to Reuters. 
The passive reserve force will be abolished on 1 January and a new active reserve force will be established over the next few years. Its size will be half that of the active duty force. 
Important deadlines in the timetable include the BiH presidency's approval of the new force structure, size, and distribution of the AFBiH by 1 July 2006. The new brigade headquarters, their assigned infantry battalions, the new infantry regiments, and the regimental headquarters must be put in place by 1 July 2007. All other branches are to establish their regimental headquarters and occupy their new stations by the end of that year. 
