09/12/2011
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 09/12/11
The eurozone crisis, having a growing impact in Serbia in the field of credit, is also causing increasing concern among the public in the region whether to exchange euros for other currencies. 
EU leaders' failure to adopt a new system of fiscal discipline Friday (December 9th) is worsening perceptions of the euro, adding to a lack of trust in the currency, after the ECB dashed hopes that it would serve as lender of last resort and Germany rejected a long-term goal of issuing common euro zone bonds. 
Forty-year-old economist turned factory manager Zarko Jovanovic is a typical example of the effect of the euro crisis in Serbia. Jovanovic took a loan in 2008 issued in euros with a ten-year maturity. Yet, the monthly interest he pays in dinars today is 30% higher than three years ago -- a situation which is expected to worsen as the EU crisis drags on. 
"My salary is not tied to any foreign currency; since 2008 it has remained the same. ... I am not afraid of which currency the loan will be tied to, but I am afraid about how much it will increase in dinars because all the currencies can only get stronger with respect to the dinar while the salaries are frozen and have no realistic possibility to increase," Jovanovic told SETimes. 
Despite potential changes in the euro's status, most bank loans are tied to the euro and dictate the amount of interest when calculated in dinars. 
Belgrade Banking Academy Professor and longtime banker Ismail Musabegovic told SETimes even if the euro's position is challenged, the interest will remain the same but will be expressed in another currency. "Citizens will still pay in dinars but recalculated with respect to another currency," he said. 
Musabegovic also explained that many experts consider the existing foreign exchange clause unconstitutional and noted there is a tendency towards "de-eurisation". 
Institute of Economic Sciences Director Dejan Eric told SETimes other currencies do not always provide financial insulation. The consequences of the euro crisis are felt to a far greater extent by those who took loans tied to the Swiss Franc, he said. 
"Four years ago, the interest rate for loans in euros was about 5-7%, while for loans in Swiss Francs about 3 to 4% and it was possible to choose between the two options. To many, especially those buying real estate, the Swiss Francs option was significantly more favourable then." 
Meanwhile, the euro weakened due to the crisis while the Franc grew stronger. For a loan of 100,000 euros, or 160,000 Swiss Francs, the loan owner still has a loan of 160,000 Swiss (minus what he repaid) but also 120,000 or 130,000 euros in francs. 
"In addition, house prices have fallen so far, so his apartment now is worth less than when [the person] took the loan," Eric said. 
Belgrade Institute of Economic Sciences Senior Associate Vlastimir Vukovic challenges the public's view of the debt crisis as the euro crisis because it identifies the monetary with the fiscal spheres. 
"Institutionally, the two are strictly separated. ... The eurozone crisis refers to the fiscal sector, which is burdened by the ˈlarge external debt and budget deficit. The public debts problem has escalated during the recession, although GDP growth slowed in these countries since the early 1990s," Vukovic told SETimes. 
Still, experts expect the eurozone crisis will negatively affect individualsˈ ability to obtain credit, as well as the government, since it will borrow at a higher rate. 
"If the interest the government offers for its ˈpaperˈ is huge, it means businesses and citizens will pay more. Loans will be more expensive, and goods too. When goods are more expensive there will be shortages, which means less credits. The economy will have a harder time to obtain finances, to finance basic and working capitals," Eric said. 
Eric added, "if there is no funding, no economic growth can be expected, and when there is no growth then there are no salaries". 
Musabegovic explained the potential problem in obtaining loans in Serbia but also potentially the region. 
"The founders of some banks in Serbia are states which do not service their debts and have problems in their local economies. Logically, there will not as much funds from the mother to the daughter company, so there will be less funds for loans, ie the loan supply will decrease," he said. 
