22/02/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 22/02/10
Two years after Kosovo's unilateral split from Serbia, its citizens are more concerned with unsolved problems than in celebrating the milestones achieved. 
Although the new state has won recognition from 65 countries and has joined international institutions such as the IMF and World Bank, it still faces a host of economic and other challenges. 
According to Koha Ditore Editor-in-Chief Agron Bajrami, there is considerable frustration. 
 "I think the second anniversary of the proclamation of the independence has found Kosovo in a complicated internal situation, with an increase of the discontent of the majority of the citizens, [due to] the lack of the expected progress in building a state based on democracy and rule of law in Kosovo," he told SETimes. 
 Bajrami, known for his sharply worded editorials, says key problems such as the economic situation, corruption and organised crime are not being addressed properly. The ethnically divided north is in a state of tension, Serbia continues to put up obstacles and the number of recognitions is inadequate, he said. 
"If we add to that the hard social situation, accompanied with the unlimited government expenses, I think it is not [surprising] that on the second anniversary of independence what comes to mind are the successes which are lacking," Bajrami said. 
Another journalist, former Zeri editor-in-chief Bardh Hamzaj, highlights positive moves the country has made. 
 "The approach towards the situation in the north has been mature," Hamzaj told SETimes. "The institutions focused on implementation of the Ahtisaari Plan. Concentration on the creation of the laws as foreseen in the plan, and on decentralisation, was visible." 
However, he added, no concrete steps have been made in dealing with corruption and organised crime. "All that has been done is to make statements," he said. 
Other pressing problems, according to Hamzaj, include improper management of the budget, problems with the justice system, lack of institutional transparency, pressure on the media, poverty and a weak foreign policy. 
Of all these challenges, the economy is the one experts most frequently cite. The unemployment rate is 45%, and tens of thousands of people depend on government assistance. The World Bank says foreign direct investment dropped 45m euros in 2009, compared to the year before. 
 "We have in the labour market every year twice the working force than the economy can absorb," analyst Ibrahim Rexhepi says. 
Officials, meanwhile, insist things are on track. "Two years after independence, Kosovo can be classified as a country which has shown fiscal stability, economic stability and is a creator of stability in the region, be it economical or political," Economy Minister Ahmet Shala said recently. 
Bujar Bukoshi, who served as prime minister of Kosovo’s government-in-exile during the Milosevic era, looks at the big picture. “Kosovo’s challenges since independence are very substantial,” he told SETimes. "The legacy of Belgrade’s brutal rule was an exhausted population, ruined infrastructure, and despoiled land. Independence, however, has enabled us to do for ourselves what must be done for our citizens.” 
“While the journey of ensuring the well-being and prosperity of all Kosovars has only begun, we have taken the critical first steps,” Bukoshi said, adding that support from the international community remains essential. 
