03/02/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/02/12
Employees of Belgrade broadcaster Avala TV, a medium with national frequency, were prevented from entering the building by security guards this week after they threatened to shut the broadcaster down for unpaid wages. 
The station paid out one month of wages to each employee on Monday (January 30th), but is still almost six months behind. Employees have been striking for more than 40 days. 
The station has 168 employees: full-time workers were last paid in July, while part-timers have seen no payments since June. 
During the strike, no news programmes or studio shows are being broadcast, only series and movies. 
"We intend to make our protest more visible; we will go out onto the streets and file lawsuits over violated rights," strikers' representative Nikola Vukomanovic told SETimes. 
He says the employees tried to talk with the employers a few months prior to the strike, which started December 22nd, but no action was taken. 
"It is absolutely unbelievable that the ministry of culture and the media has not said a word about our strike. The state, instead of protecting the workers who have been working hard and earned their salaries, is protecting the interests of very wealthy owners," Vukomanovic said. 
Avala TV has several owners; the majority owner is Austrian Johannes Werner Krauss of Greenberg Invest with a 48.4% share, followed by businessman Danko Djunic with 45.65% and media magnate Zeljko Mitrovic with 4.9%. 
The owners claim the economic crisis is to blame for the non-payment and are calling on the employees to end the strike and wait for their paychecks. 
At a meeting with Serbian Broadcasting Agency officials on January 11th, the owners informed them that the employees will be paid one and a half times their salary by the end of the month and another two times by March 1st. But since the meeting, Monday's payment is the only money the staff has seen. 
But the broadcaster is also in danger of losing its license. The Broadcasting Agency launched proceedings on January 26th to revoke Avala TV's national frequency due to the non-payment of the mandatory monthly broadcasting fee for November and December. 
"If [Avala TV] wants to keep using the frequency, it must settle its obligations by April, in line with the legal procedure," agency Vice-President Goran Karadzic told SETimes. 
He told members of the Avala TV strike committee that everything will be in accordance with the law. 
"The decision [to withdraw the license] will be made in late March or early April, depending on when the [Broadcasting Agency] Council meets," Karadzic said. 
"We hope and expect that the owners of Avala TV will find a way to pay the employees their salaries and then the debts as well." 
Journalists Association of Serbia President Ljiljana Smajlovic fully supports the demands of the employees and calls on the state to observe their rights and media freedoms. 
"The state has no mechanism to force an employer to pay the employees their salaries, while at the same time it has means of bringing money into its own budget," Smajlovic told SETimes. 
She said that with the high level of censorship in the Serbian media, the strike at Avala TV is a brave move. 
"If a journalist cannot ask their employer when they will get their salary, how can one expect that journalist to be able to ask, for example, the president of the state about barricades in northern Kosovo?" Smajlovic asked. 
