01/06/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 01/06/04
At a celebration in Zagreb last month marking Entrepreneurs' Day, Croatian President Stipe Mesic said he considers modern, competence-based management the best response to the challenges faced by the government as it seeks to reduce unemployment and establish a foreign trade balance.
It is managers, the president said, who can provide workers with motivating salaries, introduce new technologies, and secure markets and taxes for the state.
According to Mesic, Croatia should emphasise production and exports as it strives to bring its economy into line with the EU. The current model of economic growth, he noted, is based on spending and public investments.
"It would be desirable to target GDP growth of more than 5 per cent," Mesic said, adding that the rate of increase of exports would have to be greater.
He also said Croatia should aim for a 65 per cent employment rate among working age people. Currently, the figure is 52 per cent.
Considering the reforms that have yet to be carried out, the president said, many companies are not capable of withstanding the pressures of competition that would come with membership in the Union.
Reacting to Mesic's speech, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said that the go-ahead given by the EU should not be undermined, and that Croatia's international status has improved.
The key for the economy is increased competitiveness, Sanader said. That will secure an increase in production, and therefore in exports, he added.
Along those lines, the prime minister said he welcomed the founding of the Association of Exporters and the adoption of 55 measures to increase competitiveness.
The government assured Croatian entrepreneurs that it would provide needed support during the process of drawing closer to the EU -- a process that, analysts say, could entail dramatic changes. It is precisely for this reason, they say, that dialogue within the Economic-Social Council is crucial, and that agreement must be reached as soon as possible on development targets.
