21/04/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 21/04/11
Amid widespread dissatisfaction among public sector employees, unions in Serbia have organized a succession of protests to express their grievances over the state of the economy. 
At issue are income levels, non-payment of salaries and poor working conditions. Meanwhile, employees of former state-owned companies strike over botched privatisations. 
Emotions have been riding high, with some resorting to unorthodox means to prove their point. In April 2009, for instance, the head of the Textile Workers' Association in Novi Pazar, Zoran Bulatovic, cut off his finger in a gesture of outrage over the "miserable position of textile workers", as he put it. 
"I don't understanding why everyone is talking only about my finger instead of about the problems we're having," Bulatovic said at the time. "This was the only way for me to protect all these people around me, because I am the head of the Textile Workers' Association. I am even ready to cut off my arm and send it to the Serbian government." 
A protest staged by three teachers' unions this year was less dramatic, but not without impact. Their three -month-long strike -- from January 28th to April 1st -- resulted in shorter classes in some schools and a complete suspension of classes in others. 
"Union members … are ready to fight, not for a revolution, but rather for better living and working conditions," said Tomislav Zivanovic, leader of the Nezavisnost teachers' trade union. 
He stressed that the teachers he represents do not want to see their woes politicized."The protest was exclusively a social uprising and the government proved to have no response to that. We ended our strike because of the hazard of some of the opposition parties reaping benefits from the strike," he told SETimes. 
On March 25th, nine union organisations from the education, judicial, police and health care sectors held a rally in Belgrade, urging authorities to start a better and more efficient social dialogue. The demonstration drew more than 10,000 people from all over Serbia. 
The Alliance of Independent Unions of Serbia is one of the biggest union organisations, with around 500,000 members. 
Alliance Vice-President Dusko Vukovic says the unions in Serbia are fighting for "regular and dignified salaries, normal working conditions, and for employers to regularly pay social deductions to the state treasury." These are all rights that unions in developed countries won a long time ago, he adds. 
Vukovic said that in Serbia -- a society in transition -- the right to earn, work and organise in unions is still unfounded. 
"We can very quickly reach a sort of social war; in fact we have been in one for years. We are full of strikes, because employees are aware that the employers and the state are incapable of providing social security for them," Vukovic said. 
Labour and Social Policy Assistant Minister Radmila Bukumiric Katic told SETimes that social dialogue in Serbia is unsatisfactory, with problems seen primarily in the closing of collective bargaining contracts in the economic sector. 
"The role of social partners, unions and employers in the decision making process is insufficient, but not wholly insignificant either," Bukumiric Katic said, adding that her ministry is trying to involve unions as much as possible in the drafting of laws and regulations important to employees. 
