03/01/2008
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 03/01/08
Irregularities in party spending during elections has long been an issue in Macedonia. In an effort to make elections more transparent, three groups submitted proposed election code amendments to parliament on December 17th. 
The ministry of justice, the OSCE Spillover Mission to Skopje and the MOST Civic Association created the proposal during a series of working group meetings between May and December. The amendments are intended to create a fair election process and incorporate three areas -- election irregularities, capabilities of the State Election Commission (SEC) and campaign funding. 
"Amendments to the election code will contribute to better visibility and accuracy in managing the election process. I hope that stuffing and breaking ballot boxes will not occur in the next election," Justice Minister Mihajlo Manevski said. 
According to the head of the OSCE Mission, Ambassador Giorgio Radicati, one of the basic conditions for implementing the election process is trust between parties and the public. "It is the direction these amendments are heading. They have been prepared in a transparent manner with participation of all relevant institutions." 
Professor of Law Renata Trenevska Deskovska said the amendments resulted from the awareness that there is no transparency in campaign funding, the recent establishment of the Administrative Court -- a panel that will be expected by the next election to rule on disputes -- and the transfer of voter's list from the justice ministry to the SEC. 
 One proposed change is to raise the ceiling for money spent by parties in campaigns from the current 1 to 2 euros per voter. The State Audit Office (SAO) would be empowered to inspect donations parties receive from individuals and the SEC would be responsible for updating the voters' lists. 
The proposed amendments would also allow the SEC to take disciplinary actions and file charges regarding election irregularities. The SAO would also be able to file charges in cases of financial irregularities. 
Other important amendments are that state bodies would not be allowed to publish advertisements funded from the budget and that broadcast and press media would be required to provide a price list for election-related advertising that would apply throughout the campaign. 
The Private Broadcasting Media Association responded by saying that the prices for advertising in private media should not be restricted. According to MOST Executive Director Darko Aleksov, a price list would not limit the prices. "Television stations can give the parties discounts, but the transaction should be carried out in a transparent manner," he said. 
The parties' lack of financial transparency was reported by the European Commission in its latest progress report on Macedonia. It found that parties had received donations that were a few times greater than disclosed in their financial statements. 
In its reports on the past elections, the SAO also described great discrepancies in party funding, where the amount reportedly donated did not match the amount spent. 
If passed, these proposed changes should help prevent electoral irregularities, including those related directly to funding. 
