29/09/2005
(AP, Reuters, International Herald Tribune, Zaman - 29/09/05; AFP, Reuters, BBC, RFE/RL, VOA, EurActiv, Turkish Daily News, Cihan News Agency, European Parliament - 28/09/05)
EU ambassadors met in Brussels on Thursday (29 September) in a new bid to overcome their differences over the Union's negotiating framework for accession talks with Turkey, due to begin Monday. If they fail to reach an agreement, the British EU presidency is expected to call an emergency meeting of the 25 member nations' foreign ministers on Sunday evening. 
Discussions on the framework remained deadlocked this week, as Austria continued to insist on a reference to an eventual "privileged partnership" instead of full membership. Ankara stressed Wednesday that this would not be acceptable, hinting that it might drop its EU bid altogether. 
"It is natural that we shall make the necessary evaluations following the clarification of the negotiating framework and take our final step accordingly," Turkish Foreign Ministry spokesman Namik Tan told reporters. "It is out of the question that we accept any formula or suggestion other than full membership." 
Turkey also has made clear that it opposes the possible inclusion of new conditions. 
Speaking on condition of anonymity, a senior Turkish diplomat told the AFP on Wednesday that it was not even clear when Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul would leave for Luxembourg, where the talks are scheduled to open Monday. 
"The airplane will be waiting at the airport and when everything is resolved, we will go," the diplomat said. 
British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, whose country is a staunch supporter of Turkey's EU bid, urged his counterparts Wednesday to enable full entry talks to begin as scheduled. 
"It would be a huge betrayal of the hopes and expectations of the Turkish people and of Prime Minister (Recep Tayyip) Erdogan's programme of reform if, at this crucial time, we turned our back on Turkey," Straw said. 
On Wednesday, the European Parliament (EP) passed a non-binding political resolution supporting the start of accession talks, but warning Ankara that it must recognise Cyprus and acknowledge the 1915 killings of Armenians as "genocide" in the course of its EU membership negotiations. It also called on the European Commission to keep tabs on whether Turkey implements a protocol extending its customs union agreement with the bloc to the ten newest EU members, including Cyprus. 
