23/12/2009
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 23/12/09 
 SETimes: Mr. Prime Minister, thank you for accepting this interview invitation. We would like to start with the current situation and the political surprise that happened on November 19th. It was reported that the governing coalition fell apart and that a new government would be formed. Then, hours later, the original government was in power again. What happened exactly? 
 Hashim Thaçi: I believe that there is no room for this to be seen as a surprise. Democracies are open systems which always allow for debate and discussion with regards to governance. This rule also applies to Kosovo. This entire issue has to do with a common democratic development, during which ideas and proposals were brought about on the continuation and consolidation of the current government. 
 SETimes: Was there not an official process that should have been used for the creation of a new government, and was there pressure to avoid the break up of the ruling coalition? 
 Thaçi: The discussions have shown that the governing coalition is strong and has adequate capacities to continue the effective and good governance of our country. Stability and efficiency are the two strongest components for the functioning of a governing coalition and the Government of the Republic of Kosovo has these components. 
 SETimes: Although there appears to be obvious tension within the coalition, how optimistic are you that the current LDK-PDK coalition will continue to function effectively? 
 Thaçi: These tensions are natural during election campaigns. It is important that these democratic tensions do not harm general state interests, because defending these interests is the main agenda of the central government. 
 SETimes: What conditions need to be present for early general elections to occur in Kosovo, and are we experiencing such conditions? 
 Thaçi: Early elections occur under circumstances where a government is unable to carry out its responsibilities and when it loses the majority in the Assembly. Our country is not faced with such a situation. The government is stable, functional, with full support in the assembly, and it continues to carry out its state-building responsibilities. 
 SETimes: In your opinion, what do you think of the current political and security situation in Kosovo? 
 Thaçi: The Republic of Kosovo is continuing to consolidate itself in all areas of statehood. The security situation is stable and we have initiated processes for our country's economic development. In terms of the international perspective, international recognition of Kosovo is continuing, regardless of the obstructions from the Belgrade, which are bound to fail. Kosovo is achieving progress in all areas. 
 SETimes: The International Court of Justice (ICJ) recently wrapped up hearings on the legitimacy of Kosovo's declaration of independence. Though numerous countries have recognised Kosovo’s independence, are you concerned about the ICJ case? 
 Thaçi: The Republic of Kosovo, together with its friendly countries, has been able to prove -- with undeniable arguments -- Kosovo’s right to be an independent and sovereign state. This allows us to believe that the opinion of the International Court of Justice will be positive for Kosovo. The independent and sovereign state of Kosovo is in full accordance with international law. 
 SETimes: What do you believe to be the most significant obstacles preventing increased foreign investment in Kosovo, and what can be done to mitigate those obstacles? 
 Thaçi: We are working hard to create appropriate conditions for foreign direct investment in our country. Reforms of our fiscal policies have already given Kosovo a competitive advantage in the region. In the last two years, we have had an increase of investment in all priority areas, such as infrastructure, education and agriculture. We will not let up on any opportunity for investment, because we realise that capital investment will influence economic growth and also lower unemployment and poverty. 
 SETimes: In your opinion, what will Kosovo look like five years from now? 
 Thaçi: Kosovo will be a state with a consolidated democracy, ready to take on its responsibilities as a member of the large family of European democracies, as a member of NATO and the European Union. 
 SETimes: On behalf of SETimes, I would like to thank you for taking time out of your busy schedule to address some of the concerns voiced by many of our readers. 
