20/04/2006
(Irish Times - 20/04/06; Reuters, AP, AFP, DPA, BBC, CNN, VOA, Radio B92, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Makfax - 19/04/06)
Nearly 6,700 people have been forced to flee their homes over the past few days, Romanian Interior Minister Vasile Blaga said on Wednesday (19 April), as the Danube River continued to flood villages and farmland in the Balkan country. 
"I don't want to create panic but there are dikes that might give in at any moment because of the rise in the Danube and strong gusts of wind," Blaga said, urging villagers not to try to return to their homes. 
At least 11 Romanian counties have been hit by floods since last week, when melting mountain snows and heavy rains pushed the level of Europe's second-longest river to new 100-year records, especially in Serbia, Romania and Bulgaria. 
While the Danube began to recede in its Serbian section on Wednesday, thousands of workers in Romania and Bulgaria continued to bolster their countries' anti-flood defences. Officials said a new flood wave could arrive from Serbia after a Danube tributary, the Tisa, rose past 10m in some places in Hungary. 
A Romanian official warned that another 10,000 people in the area surrounding the southwestern village of Bistret might have to be evacuated. 
Of the nearly 700 houses that have been inundated in Romania so far, more than 180 are said to have been destroyed. About 500km of roads have been swamped, 19 bridges have been destroyed and some 47,500 hectares of land submerged, according to Reuters. As a result of this month's floods, the losses Romania's agriculture sector is expected to suffer are estimated at about 1.2m euros. 
In Serbia, more than 122,500 hectares of farmland are underwater and another 112,000 hectares are in danger, the country's agriculture ministry said. Local authorities have placed farm damage at 35.7m euros. With the Danube closed to shipping for nearly three weeks this month, ships are said to have transported less than a third of the usual average monthly quantity of goods in April. 
In Bulgaria, around 250 buildings have been inundated and about 150 people have been evacuated from towns along the Danube. Apart from several roads being swamped, the floods are not said to have caused other major damage to infrastructure. Citing a Bulgarian Agriculture Ministry official, Reuters reported that the floods -- largely caused by rising groundwater -- have affected some 1,200 hectares of wheat. The floods are expected to delay the spring sowing campaign in the affected areas in northern Bulgaria and some fields are likely to remain soaked for the rest of the year. 
Most of the Bulgarian ports on the Danube remain underwater, but officials voiced hope the river's level will start falling early next week. "But at least until then, shipping will be limited or forbidden," said Georgi Georgiev, head of the country's Danube monitoring agency. 
As Serbia, Romania and Bulgaria continued to prevent further destructive flooding, an international agency monitoring the river said on Wednesday that trials for a regional flood alert system would begin later this year. 
According to the Vienna-based International Commission for the Protection of the Danube River (ICPDR), the new integrated early warning system, which would detect flood danger from a number of factors including regional rainfall and snowmelt, will give up to ten days' warning of expected floods. 
"There was a general awareness in the countries affected that there would be problems, but the magnitude has caught everyone unawares," ICPDR executive secretary Peter Weller was quoted as saying Wednesday, referring to the three Balkan countries. The new system, developed with EU funding, "would complement national systems, some of which are very good but give less warning than this one," he added. "Floods are a natural process and will still happen, but this would give an extra degree of warning." 
