04/08/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 04/08/05
Under key defence reforms agreed on last month by a special commission, Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) separate armies would be merged into a single force under state-level command. The Defence Reform Commission (DRC), which includes representatives of all three major constituencies in the country -- Croats, Muslims and Serbs -- endorsed the changes on 20 July. They now must be ratified by the central parliament and BiH's two post-war entities -- the Republika Srpska and the Federation of BiH. 
If approved, the entity ministries of defence and commands would be taken over by BiH defence institutions and a new single defence budget would come into effect. The far-reaching changes would help BiH meet the requirements for NATO membership. 
"NATO offers collective security to us and the suggested concept of armed forces fits NATO," said BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic, adding that security and stability are important to all citizens of the country. 
The new BiH Armed Forces would be comprised exclusively of professional personnel, with conscription abolished as of 1 January 2006. On the same date, the 60,000-member Passive Reserve force would also be abolished. A new Active Reserve force would be established over the next few years, constituting 50 per cent of the active duty force. It would be staffed by professionals who have completed their active duty service and individual specialists recruited from the population. 
The current total number of 12,000 professional soldiers would be reduced by eliminating those positions currently involved with the training and administration of conscripts and the passive reserves. The size of the active duty BiH Armed Forces would be between 9,000 and 10,000. 
The armed forces would reflect the demographic composition of BiH. Muslims, Croats and Serbs would be equally represented in each senior decision-making level, beginning with the BiH presidency and down to the operational command and support command. 
The BiH Armed Forces would consist of three multiethnic manoeuvre brigades, one tactical support brigade and one aviation brigade, all under the control of the existing operational command. The three manoeuvre brigades would each consist of three infantry battalions, one from each of three new infantry regiments. 
Each of the new three infantry regiments would be responsible for maintaining and fostering the military heritage of the units from which they descend -- that is, the Bosniak-led Army of the Republic of BiH, the Croatian Defence Council and the Army of the Republika Srpska. While they would have no operational or administrative authorities, each regiment would have a colonel, who would serve in a strictly honorary role as head of the regiment. 
This package of measures paves the way for an enduring solution, according to members of the DRC. "Everyone had to give up something they wanted, but everyone got everything they really needed," said DRC co-chairman Raffi Gregorian, after the agreement was reached. 
