07/10/2011
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 07/10/11
Although the Macedonian census began on October 1st as scheduled, the surprise resignation of the State Census Commission (DPK) President Vesna Janevska and her deputy Abdumenaf Bedzheti, the day before shook the public. 
Janevska said she was leaving her post due to fraud plaguing the census process. 
She explained there have been attempts to identify citizens by photocopies of their identification cards and passports, which is "absolutely contrary to the law and the Eurostat methodology". 
"Commission members belonging to the Albanian and Turkish communities do not allow a minimum trust in the [census] process. Information from the field suggests that another census falsification is in the works," Janevska said. 
Despite the resignations, which were quickly filled by new appointees, the Eurostat monitoring mission provided a positive assessment. 
"It is more than certain that Macedonia will conduct a successful census ... The country is ready for reliable and qualitative data collection," Eurostat Director Peter Everaers said. 
Interpretation about the eligibility of Macedonian citizens residing abroad to participate in the census has been at the heart of disagreements between Macedonian and Albanian political parties. 
After much debate, the country's Statistics Office President Blagica Novkovska offered a definitive answer. 
"The law clearly states ... those who work abroad and have visited Macedonia for only several days in the last 12 months will not be tallied nor will be included in the total population figure." 
A census is a complex statistical operation but one which provides a snapshot of the situation, not the basis for political or ethnic division, University American College Law Professor Zvonimir Jankulovski told SETimes. 
"Attempts to turn the census into a race to increase ethnicities' percentages is wrong and problematic, and must not be allowed," he said. 
Many Albanians insist they constitute 30% or more of Macedonia's population. Gazmen Kadri, 31-year-old Skopje resident voiced a commonly-held view among Albanians that all should be counted regardless of duration of residing abroad. "If a portion of them resides abroad it does not mean they should not be tallied." 
Macedonians vehemently disagree, claiming there is a scheme which includes Albanians from Kosovo, Albania, the south of Serbia, and elsewhere double dipping in the Macedonian and other countries' censuses. 
"In the 2002 census, the number of Albanians was artificially increased to fit the constitutional changes which provided exclusive rights and privileges to minorities that constitute more than 20% of the total population. That way a second constituent people was promoted in Macedonia even though they constitute 16% to 17% of the population," TMRO-VEP party President Strasho Angelovski told SETimes 
Angelovski argues that a repeat of the 2002 census may cause widespread discontent because it will be perceived as a threat to the Macedonian nation state. 
"If however, the census shows the Albanians' real percentage, the international community's attempts to secure collective rights and privileges for this ethnic minority will fail. They may take to violence, putting the peace in the Balkans in question," he said. 
Meanwhile, the government reiterated the legal requirement for all census workers who are public administration to participate and their managers to free them from work responsibilities during the October 1st-15th census period. 
Gostivar Mayor Rufi Osmani, however, issued an ultimatum to municipal employees to choose between participating in the census or work for the municipality. 
Osmani, an ethnic Albanian, explained his move is necessitated by the normal functioning of the municipality. 
More than half of municipal employees are engaged in the census and should focus on the pressing municipal problems instead, Osmani said. 
The government announced it expects to issue the census results in December. 
