10/09/2004
(Reuters, AFP, Tanjug - 09/09/04; EUobserver - 08/09/04) 
Serbia-Montenegro will not gain admission to the EU and NATO unless it co-operates fully with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the country's foreign minister said Thursday (9 September). 
During a visit to Italy, Vuk Draskovic named Euro-Atlantic integration as one of his country's top priorities. 
"We have one very big obstacle that we must overcome if we want to join NATO and the EU. I'm talking about co-operation with The Hague tribunal," Draskovic said. He added that the economy would pick up if that obstacle were removed, paving the way for speedier progress towards EU membership. 
Belgrade has been criticised repeatedly for failing to meet its international obligation to arrest and hand over to the ICTY suspects accused of war crimes during the Balkan conflicts of the 1990s. 
Former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic and some of his allies are already in the dock, but Belgrade has made no move to extradite other key suspects to The Hague, including four top Serb generals indicted last year over their roles in the 1998-1999 Kosovo conflict. Wartime Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic are also still at large. 
Emphasising that all suspects wanted by the ICTY must be sent to The Hague immediately, Draskovic said they had brought shame on his country and did not deserve to be shielded. 
"There is no reason to protect them," the AFP quoted him as telling reporters in Rome on Thursday. "Our Serbian national obligation must be to build up some kind of Chinese wall between Serbs and followers of Milosevic. Serbia-Montenegro belongs to Europe and Europe belongs to Serbia-Montenegro," he said. 
Meanwhile, Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic said the problem of Serbia's co-operation with the ICTY should be resolved by consensus. 
 "We have republican President (Boris) Tadic, we have Prime Minister (Vojislav) Kostunica, we of the G17 Plus are also in the government, and we must all stand behind a united decision," Serbia's Tanjug news agency quoted Dinkic as saying Wednesday in the southern Serbian town of Nis. 
On Thursday, the ICTY's co-ordinator for Serbia-Montenegro rejected media reports suggesting a possible deal between the UN tribunal and Belgrade to allow the four Serb generals to be tried at home. 
Given Belgrade's failure to co-operate with The Hague tribunal, it is "inappropriate" to discuss the issue at all, said Alexandra Milenov. "Politicians who still speak about the possibility of such a deal are misleading the public, and even worse, contributing to the mistaken belief that the tribunal is a political institution with which they can bargain," she added. 
