25/01/2006
(Kathimerini - 25/01/06; AP, Athens News Agency, Macedonian Press Agency, HINA, SEE Security Monitor, Reporter.gr, FENA, Makfax, MIA, Radio B92 - 24/01/06)
Southeast European (SEE) countries must shed the burden of past conflicts and enhance their political and economic co-operation, Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis said Tuesday (24 January). 
"Southeastern Europe should no longer be a region of misunderstanding, violence and war," the Greek leader said, opening a meeting of the foreign ministers of the countries in the Southeast European Co-operation Process (SEECP). "It deserves to become a region of co-operation and dialogue, productively integrated in broader international institutions, as a part of Europe, where it belongs." 
The nine-member SEECP includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Macedonia, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro and Turkey. Moldova has observer status. 
Albania, Romania and Turkey did not send their foreign ministers, but were represented by other government officials. The one-day meeting was attended also by delegations from Austria, which currently holds the rotating EU presidency, as well as from the United States, Russia, Japan and the Stability Pact. 
Strengthening of political dialogue among the SEECP countries, enhancing regional co-operation, including in the areas of economy, energy and infrastructure development, and current developments in the region, with an emphasis on Kosovo, were the main issues on the agenda of the meeting in Athens. 
Karamanlis, whose country holds the one-year SEECP chairmanship until May, said the countries in the association are bound by their Euro-Atlantic orientation and share the will to "free our societies from burdens of the past" and to expand their horizons. "In such societies, terrorism and extremism, corruption and organised crime have no place," he said. 
According to the Greek leader, the SEE Energy Community, the pan-European corridors, the natural gas and oil pipelines are key elements of the process of economic co-operation and infrastructure development, needed for the region's EU integration. 
Establishment of a single free trade area could give a new boost to the region's economies, he added. 
At the end of the meeting, the SEE officials adopted a declaration on Kosovo, calling for a peaceful resolution of the province's status. The UN-sponsored Kosovo status negotiations were due to begin Wednesday, but were postponed following the death of Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova on Saturday. 
Any solution "must be reached through peaceful means, excluding any form of violence, and should be a product of dialogue and negotiations," the SEECP foreign ministers' declaration said. "The establishment of a democratic and multiethnic society in Kosovo is a prerequisite for its European future," it added. 
Rugova's death, according to Greek Foreign Minister Petros Molyviatis, was "an additional difficulty concerning the already complicated problem of Kosovo". 
Croatia, which will take over the rotating SEECP chairmanship from Greece in May, says that the EU aspirations of the member nations will be a focal issue during its tenure at the helm of the association. Bulgarian Foreign Minister Ivaylo Kalfin said Tuesday his country was ready to succeed Croatia at the SEECP chair in May 2007. 
