21/05/2007
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 21/05/07
Romanian President Traian Basescu won a referendum on his impeachment Saturday (May 19th), with 74.3% voting in favor of his return to office, according to a count of 99% of votes. About 25% voted for Basescu to be removed from office. However, turnout was low, with only 44% of registered voters taking part, according to the Central Electoral Bureau. 
"We are in front of a reality that cannot be analysed by the politicians on TV anymore. We are, this time, in front of a reality imposed by the vote of the Romanian people," Basescu said after the exit-polls confirmed his victory by a wide margin. "I'm calling on the Romanian Parliament to co-operate according to today's vote of the Romanians," he said. 
Basescu joined hundreds of supporters Saturday night in Bucharest's main square after the referendum, to call for the resignation of Prime Minister Calin Tariceanu. 
The referendum was a result of last month's alliance by five political parties that accuse Basescu of violating the constitution by usurping the role of the prime minister and criticising the courts. 
Basescu has said the main reason for his clash with Parliament was his intention to protect the judiciary from political meddling. 
The president said he will propose that the constitution is amended to create the framework for a unicameral legislature, or at least reduce the number of MPs by 35% to 40%. "Romanians obviously want political class modernisation, the open-party ballots, and the revision of the country's constitution," he said Saturday night. 
The priority, he maintains, is the uninominal vote. "If by the end of July the political parties don't change the law so that the uninominal vote could be applied as of 2008, when the new parliamentary elections take place, then we will meet at another referendum in autumn, at the president's request, for the people to force the Parliament to chose the uninominal vote," he had. 
Basescu has presented a 12 part plan for a "truly European Romania" which includes a coherent political majority, an independent judicial system, dismantling of the oligarchs, extension of the educational system reforms and observing international engagements. 
His resounding victory led to problems within the parties that initiated the impeachment procedures. The Bucharest branch of the National Liberal Party is considering withdrawing from the government and joining the opposition. The Social Democratic Party is calling on its leaders to assume responsibilty for the failure of the referendum. 
Tariceanu played down the importance of the outcome, saying "the Romanians gave Basescu a second chance". Social Democratic Party leader Mircea Geoana said Basescu had "won a victory without glory", since less than 50% of voters participated in the referendum. 
