27/12/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times in Podgorica – 27/12/05
Transnational crime will be a defining issue of the 21st century -- as important as the Cold War was during the previous century -- according to the organisers of a high level international summit held in Monte Carlo last month. 
The 7th International Summit on Transnational Crime brought together about 300 political and business leaders to discuss topics as diverse as international terrorism, mafia networks, the fight against official corruption, money laundering, human trafficking, counterfeiting of registered trademarks and cybercrime. The event was held under the patronage of HRH Prince Albert II of Monaco. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) was the focus of one of the summit's plenary sessions. Participants gathered to discuss the role of international organisations in promoting rule of law in the country. Charles Harns Head, of the International Organisation for Migration, spoke about the important link between migratory movements and transnational crime, in BiH and elsewhere. 
"The obvious links are in the trafficking in human beings and smuggling of migrants," Head said. "The more subtle linkages concern the general effect of corruption fueled through the influence of transnational organised crime on quality of life and quality of governance in some countries, and resultantly on the inclination of persons to migrate, at times by most any means available, and the susceptibility of these persons to smugglers and traffickers." 
Affluent nations must help less prosperous ones build the capacity to manage migration and smash trafficking networks, Head suggested. To reduce illegal migration, root causes such as lack of development and economic opportunity must also be addressed, he added. 
Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe Vice President Jean-Charles Gardetto and Helene Bourgade of the European Commission's Security and Migration unit also addressed the BiH session. 
At another session, dealing with the role of financial channels in the fight against crime, one of the speakers was Montenegrin Deputy Prime Minister Dragan Djurovic. Thanks to European integration processes, Djurovic said, Southeast European countries are becoming important partners in combating organised crime by adopting the required European standards. 
Montenegro is in the process of shaping its legal and legislative framework for an efficient fight against organised crime and corruption, Djurovic said. In addition to a criminal code and a law establishing a special prosecutor for organised crime, he noted, the Montenegrin government has also adopted a criminal procedure law and a law on a witness protection programme. A strategy for the fight against human trafficking, action plan for the drug addiction prevention, and strategy for control and decrease of small-caliber weapons have also been adopted, he said. 
The event was opened by Jean-Paul Carteron, chairman of the Monaco World Summit. The guest speakers at the opening were Slovak Deputy Prime Minister for European Affairs, Human Rights and Minorities Pal Csaky, Croatian Justice Minister Vesna Skare-Ozbolt, Laurent Marcadier, vice president and secretary general at the Court of Paris, and Kiril Bougartchev from the Paris-based law firm Gide Loyrette Nouel. 
