15/04/2009
By Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Athens – 15/04/09
Greece's ruling party, New Democracy (ND), has a tenuous one-seat majority in parliament. With one of its MPs now under investigation for alleged bribe-taking, that majority may now be at risk, raising the likelihood of fresh elections. 
The MP, Aristotle Pavlidis, allegedly demanded bribes from a shipowner in exchange for subsidised ferry routes -- an incident said to have occurred while he was serving as Aegean minister. Only parliament can investigate current or former ministers, and lawmakers voted on April 7th to form a special commission to probe their embattled colleague. 
It is not the first ethical tangle for the government of Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis. A September 2008 scandal over an illegal land swap between the government and the Vatopedi monastery led to the resignation of two ministers and a parliamentary inquiry. Greek taxpayers stood to lose up to 100m euros in the dubious deal. 
The scandals have been particularly damaging because they come at a time of belt-tightening for the public. The Karamanlis administration has imposed tax increases on high earners and a freeze on public sector wages, moves that provoked vociferous resistance. The prime minister insists his policies are the right ones, saying he is concerned only with what is "useful to the country" and not with being liked. The succession of scandals, however, has been eroding the government's moral authority. 
 Karamanlis still remains a comparatively popular figure. A poll by Ekathemerini found that 42% of Greeks see him as the best choice for prime minister, compared to only 33% for his main rival, PASOK leader George Papandreou. 
When it comes to their political parties, however, opinion is reversed. The same poll found PASOK leading ND by more than seven percentage points -- 41.5% to 34%. 
It remains unclear whether PASOK is in a position to capitalise on the government's woes. The left-wing opposition party has yet to heal its own internal divisions, with pro-European Social Democrats facing off against populist nationalists. Papandreou and his party proved unable to capitalise on ND's vulnerabilities in the 2007 general elections, resulting in a second term for Karamanlis. 
The dire economic situation, moreover, may constrain PASOK's ability to promise voters a major policy change. Prominent figures within the party, such as Anna Diamantopoulou, have acknowledged that unpopular austerity measures will still be needed. 
Karamanlis, meanwhile, has been searching for coalition partners in case the one-seat ND majority evaporates. So far, though, he has not found allies. Two smaller parties, the Coalition of the Radical Left (SYRIZA) and the right-wing Popular Orthodox Rally (LAOS), have rejected the idea of caucusing with either ND or PASOK. 
