11/10/2011
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 11/10/11
Macedonians often cite the ability to obtain a home, particularly under favourable conditions, as one of their biggest concerns. 
Especially affected are low-income individuals and young people who want to establish a family, because they find the high interest rates cost-prohibitive. 
"We have been married for several years now and thought of obtaining a mortgage. But a simple math suggests the high interest rate automatically means a very high repayment amount," Skopje resident Sonja Markovska told SETimes. 
To address these concerns, the government decided to offer two types of subsidies that will take effect in January. 
The first covers half of the individual's mortgage monthly payment in the first five years of purchase. The second covers half of the mortgage. 
To enact this measure, a draft Law on Subsidising Mortgages was introduced in parliament and passed in the first instance. It now awaits a parliamentary debate to be adjusted and finalised. 
Eligibility criteria under the proposed law require that individuals do not own property, have a monthly income of less than 900 euros, and all necessary documents for the desired home are in order. The apartment or home must be purchased directly from the investor or builder. 
Moreover, there are additional conditions. An individual must not seek mortgages over 50,000 euros; the repayment period should not be shorter than 20 years; and the price of the property should not exceed 900 euros per square meter. 
As a reference, the price of a square meter of residential property ranges from 1,300 euros in Skopje's downtown to 800 euros in Skopje's periphery. 
In the case of the first type of subsidy, recipients have no obligation whatsoever to repay any amount. Regarding the second type of subsidy, recipients are required to return the entire sum after a period of 20 years. 
The government however, provides the option for the funds to be repaid in five annual installments without interest, provided the subsidy share of the mortgage is not higher than 25%. 
The government proposal has met with enthusiastic response. Skopje resident Zoran Trajcevski explained to SETimes the need for just such measures. 
"Both my wife and I have regular monthly income, but we do not have our own apartment. Considering the fact that we just got married, and no home from our parents, we now weigh carefully which of the two options would suit us better," Trajcevski said. 
Under the first subsidy, the interest rate is locked at 4.99%. 
Most banks say the subsidies as defined in the draft law are acceptable, though they prefer to see the final draft to determine how to position themselves. 
The opportunity to offer mortgages to a large amount of people in a situation of regional and world crisis -- and to stimulate the construction sector -- is not lost on Macedonia's biggest Komercijalna Banka, which praised the government initiative. 
A finance ministry official who requested anonymity said the negotiations with the banks have intensified in the past several weeks to clear up all the issues, terms and conditions under which credits will be awarded, and then subsidised. 
The upcoming debate in parliament aims to ensure there will be no possibility for abuses of any kind. 
However, a sticking point is the part of the draft law requiring applicants not to have owned property in the last 12 months or not to have "alienated" property six months prior to submitting an application. Analysts expect modifications of that requirement. 
