03/02/2005
(The Guardian - 03/02/05; World Bank, Reuters, AP, AFP, BBC, RFE/RL, Sofia News Agency, BNN, MIA - 02/02/05)
Leaders of eight Central and East European countries gathered in Sofia on Wednesday (2 February) to launch a ten-year initiative to improve the status of the Roma, the continent's most vulnerable minority. The former communist states participating in the unprecedented project signed a declaration expressing their commitment to work for the inclusion of Roma in their societies. 
 "Our governments will work to lift discrimination and overcome unacceptable differences between the Roma and the remaining members of society," the declaration read. 
It was signed by prime ministers Simeon Saxe-Coburg of Bulgaria, Ferenc Gyurcsany of Hungary, Ivo Sanader of Croatia, Vlado Buckovski of Macedonia, Vojislav Kostunica of Serbia and deputy prime ministers Pavel Nemec of the Czech Republic, Marco Bela of Romania and Pal Czaky of Slovakia. The World Bank and the Open Society Institute are the principal sponsors of the initiative, which is supported by other international organisations, including the EU and the UNDP. 
"In the context of a united Europe, it is unacceptable to have a large and growing Roma minority which is so much worse off than the majority which itself is shrinking in numbers," World Bank President James Wolfensohn said in Sofia on Wednesday. "It is morally unacceptable, but it is also politically unthinkable in terms of Europe's long-term stability and security." 
 Between seven million and nine million Roma live on the continent. Approximately six million live in Central and East Europe. The group is now one of the largest, poorest, and fastest growing minorities in Europe. Infant mortality is higher than that among other groups in their countries of residence, while life expectancy is 10 to 15 years shorter. Roma families have more children, who are often sent to schools for the disabled, if they go to school at all. Lacking education and skills, they have fewer job opportunities and are often discriminated against by potential employers. 
Quoting newly released UNDP data, the BBC reported Wednesday that five times more Roma live below the poverty line than do the majority populations in Bulgaria and Serbia, and three times more in Macedonia and Romania. Seven out of ten Roma living in Romania do not have access to running water. In Kosovo, only one in ten Roma aged 12 and above has finished primary school. The Roma in Macedonia owe in electricity bills more than seven times their monthly earnings. 
Under the initiative, each of the participating countries is to implement a national action plan containing measurable benchmarks for improvements that they will have to meet by 2015. The focus will be on four priority areas -- education, employment, health, and housing. Provision has also been made for a follow-up framework to monitor progress. A Roma Education Fund has already been created, with initial funding of around $43m. 
 "If we do nothing, we will see continued disaffection and suffering," Wolfensohn said. "If we succeed … [the initiative] offers an opportunity to turn the tide of history and harness the political will to include the Roma as full citizens in European societies. 
