07/12/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 07/12/06
Once he was nicknamed "The Flip-Flopper" (Razgandeanul) and "The Weakling" (Moliceanul) of Romanian politics. But Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu has remained in power, despite difficult challenges. 
Tariceanu is determined to continue at the head of a Liberal Democrat government after Romania joins the EU on January 1st. But his fragmented government will need to complete many pending reforms after accession. 
Just few days ago, many doubted Tariceanu's chances of political survival. Within his own party, Tariceanu has been facing a challenge by an important faction close to his rival, President Traian Basescu. Twenty-nine lawmakers -- about a third of all Liberal MPs -- rebelled against the beleaguered prime minister, holding him responsible for the party's plunge in the polls. The so-called Liberal Platform is threatening to vote alongside the opposition to bring down Tariceanu's cabinet. 
Meanwhile, the minor Conservative Party, together with other 30 lawmakers, left the coalition government and joined the opposition. The Conservatives, led by the controversial media tycoon and former Securitate informant Dan Voiculescu, had been Tariceanu's main allies in his political battle with Basescu. The prospect of early elections -- repeatedly sought by Basescu -- seemed more plausible. 
Surprisingly, however, Tariceanu managed to agree on a cabinet reshuffle with his Democratic Party rivals, offering them a greater say. Last month, a Democrat politician took over the defence portfolio, formerly held by the Liberal Party. 
For the time being, Basescu's party has stopped talking about early elections. Instead, it is stressing the need "to ensure political stability". 
The reshuffled cabinet lacks a parliamentary majority. From now on, the Liberal-Democrat Alliance will have to secure the support of different political groups or even individual MPs for every initiative. It is hoping to take advantage of a divided opposition, which is equally unhappy with the prospect of early elections. 
The first major test will be next week, during the vote on 2007 budget. 
A period of political turmoil seems imminent. The Liberals and Democrats will have to negotiate reforms -- on a case-by-case basis -- with the Socialists who lost power in 2004, as well as with the Conservatives, who already have blocked anticorruption measures, the nationalistic Greater Romania Party, and the prime minister's Liberal Platform opponents. 
 Brussels, meanwhile, is concerned about Romania's ability to handle EU funding and whether there is enough political will to continue the fight against corruption. 
A law establishing an Integrity Agency to verify politicians' wealth has been blocked in parliament, although it is an EU-specific benchmark. Should Romania fail to meet this benchmark, the EU would suspend judicial co-operation. 
 "Romania's political climate gives the EU jitters," said the Financial Times recently, quoting a Western analyst based in Bucharest. "It certainly shows that the politicians here don't take the EU as seriously as they should," the analyst said. 
