12/11/2012
By Lily Lynch and Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Skopje -- 05/11/12
Recent incidents at football matches in Serbia have again highlighted the widespread problem of racism in sports. While numerous similar incidents have occurred in other European countries, the response of Serbian authorities to the incidents has drawn considerable criticism both at home and abroad. 
The unfortunate trend has also forced sports associations and governments to revisit the question of how to stem racism and violent extremism in sports, and more generally, how racist sentiment is linked to the treatment of minority groups. 
An October Under-21 qualifier between Serbia and England in the central Serbian town of Krusevac drew international attention after Serbian fans allegedly chanted racist abuse at members of the English team. 
England team member Danny Rose said that he was subjected to racial chants and was pelted with trash and other objects throughout the match. The tense game culminated in a brawl that included players and staff on both sides. 
Tomislav Karadzic, president of the Serbian Football Association, apologised for the participation of Serbian players in the brawl, but denied that there had been any racist chanting at the match. 
"The Serbian people have never been, nor will be, racist," Karadzic said in a statement. 
While some players and officials on the English side demanded that Serbia be banned from participation in future matches, the Serbian Interior Ministry pressed charges against two English players and an assistant coach for participating in the fight. 
"The Serbian response was one of defiance and denial, with outright condemnation being replaced by further confrontation," Ian Bancroft, of Transconflict, told SETimes. 
Some also criticised the government's refusal to frame the events as part of the larger problem of intolerance towards minorities in Serbia. 
"Racism and other forms of prejudice are not only confined to the football stadium, but afflict all those deemed in some way different, particularly minorities and vulnerable groups. Accepting or turning a blind eye to any form of intolerance only serves to encourage even more extreme examples of intolerance -- including the use of violence -- which are often grounded in ignorance, prejudice and stereotypes," Bancroft told SETimes. 
Others expressed concern that unchecked racist and xenophobic sentiment in sports could result in violent confrontations, and that the government was failing to take such threats seriously. 
However, the new government insists that it will take a tough stance on violence and extremism in sports. 
"Violence in sports is one of our primary concerns, and one of our primary areas of activity," Natasa Mihailovic, a public relations officer at the ministry of youth and sports, told SETimes. 
At a recent football match between Belgrade and Novi Pazar, fans of the Novi Pazar club unveiled a sign reading "heart, kidney, lungs, long live the yellow house," in reference to the Serbian victims of alleged organ trafficking during the Kosovo War of the late 1990s. 
The sign was made in response to a banner displayed by Serbian fans at a game in March which read, "knife, wire, Srebrenica," referencing the Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) in 1995, in which an estimated 8,000 Muslim men and boys were killed. 
As in the Krusevac case, some criticised the Serbian government's response to these events. 
"The first step is always denial, and the second step is relativisation. The state is quick to accuse the other side of racism, instead of fighting racism as soon as it appears. It's clear that the state is not ready to unconditionally fight nationalism or racism in sports; when it fights racism it does so selectively," Jovana Vukovic, co-ordinator with the Regional Centre for Minorities, told SETimes. 
Other countries in Europe and the region have extensive experience with the problem, and some say knowledge sharing is often the best way to combat shared problems. 
In Macedonia, police officers have been trained by their French colleagues to deal with hooligans at football matches. Shouting racist, nationalist messages and burning flags of foreign countries is regular décor at sporting events in the country. 
Ivan Anastasovski, former vice president of the Football Federation of Macedonia, said political manipulation is the main cause of the violence. 
"Sports groups are numerous and influential … they have interesting voting potential. The 20 years period of transition, conflicts, wars and bad economic situations have frustrated people, and sport [events] are good ground to promote themselves and their ideas," Anastasovski told SETimes. 
Naume Ugrenovik, who has been an employee in the sporting arena for years, said states should single out the problem fans and ban them, like they do in England. 
"The biggest penalty for an English fan is not having the right to enter the stadium for two years. But they have a good record and tracking of individuals. It is the only way to overcome these problems," Ugrenovik told SETimes. 
The groups of fans that are part of the problem are not random, Saso Srbinoski, Macedonia beach volleyball coach, told SETimes. "They have a specific purpose and task." 
Various initiatives to prevent violence in sports have been held in the region. 
Football Against Racism in Europe (FARE) is a network of NGOs that fight racism, nationalism and discrimination in sports. The group recently held an "action week against racism and discrimination in European football," where participants played football and discussed public messages against violence in sports. 
The initiative aimed to increase public awareness of the discrimination in football, create a united front by bringing together everyone in the sport to develop ideas and new practices to challenge exclusion. 
The initiative started as a minor campaign in nine countries in 2001, but now has become the largest initiator of anti-discrimination activities in sports in 41 countries. 
"The goal is to transfer to the youth the message that 'No matter how much we are different we are equal. At the sports fields, although we are with a different color we all are playing the game according to the same rules'," Rahela Simeonova Maneva, from the Organisation of Women of municipality of Sveti Nikole, member of the FARE network, told SETimes. 
