09/08/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 09/08/06
Over the past month, Macedonian Radio Television (MRT) has been facing the deepest crisis in its 62-year existence. Employees have staged a strike over unpaid salaries and benefits. The company is operating in the red and programme quality has tumbled. 
All this is happening as MRT undergoes a transformation from a government-run company into an independently operating public service, meant to be free from political influences and run according to corporate management principles. These changes were stipulated in a radio broadcasting law adopted a few months ago. However, it is not being implemented fully. 
Under the law, MRT should be funded through a broadcasting fee paid by citizens -- amounting to about 5 euros per month per household. During the transition period, while the new collection system is not yet functioning, the government is supposed to provide MRT with 80 per cent of the amount that would otherwise come from the fee. MRT estimates put the figure at 4.8m euros. 
But the government has not remitted that amount. The outgoing administration of Vlade Buckovski said it paid only about 1.6m euros to MRT. At the same time it called for an audit of the broadcaster's financial operations, seemingly hinting at irregularities. 
Meanwhile, the new MRT Council was constituted and an open competition was announced for the Board of Directors. But VMRO-DPMNE, the party forming Macedonia's new government, has asked the Council to call off the competition, on the grounds that the broadcaster has no way to pay for it. 
The Council cried foul, accusing the VMRO-DPMNE and its allies of trying to appoint their own people to MRT bodies. 
"The parliament does not appoint members of the MRT bodies any more,” MRT Council President Goran Koevski said. "It confers this duty to the MRT Council, and the members of other bodies are selected in public vacancy announcements." 
On Monday (7 August), MRT General Director Gordana Stosic resigned, saying that she has been ignored by the state institutions over the last four years and was unable to make necessary changes. 
Many veteran MRT reporters have gone public with comments on the situation. The chief editor of the news programme wrote a column in Utrinski Vesnik, asking what would happen with the "indispensable national treasure" -- audio and video documentation of Macedonia's recent history -- if the broadcaster collapses. 
OSCE and international donors -- including the Dutch, French and German governments -- say the broadcaster needs a long-term programme for revitalisation. Adoption of the broadcast law was a key milestone, they say. But before further progress can be made, the problem with employee salaries must be resolved. 
