14/11/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 14/11/11
About 10% of Romanians admitted they did not take part in the census either because a census worker did not visit them or they were not at home when visited, according to an IRES poll last week. 
The poll results amplify existing concerns about that the accuracy of the census data, whose collection concluded on October 31st and came at a price tag of 46m euros. 
A total of 8.3 million households and 19.6 million people were registered, the National Institute of Statistics (INS) announced. But the INS also said that the census figures do not include those self-tallied, employees of the state security apparatus such as police, as well as those residing abroad for a long time. 
 Many view the census as being on the wrong footing from the very beginning when authorities gave contradictory information about the requirement to submit a personal identification number (PIN). 
Speculation spread then that the PIN could be misused for illegal purposes or for electoral ones, causing many Romanians to refuse to provide it, thus leaving data forms incomplete. 
 Amid the controversy, an INS spokesperson announced it is not mandatory to provide the PIN, but the INS head refuted the spokesperson just few days later and fired him for misinforming the public. 
"First, the organisers sent contradictory messages -- the PIN situation, one day it was mandatory, the next day it was not -- then communication with the media was flawed so the messages that reached the people lacked coherence," Cristina Moldovan, Evenimentul Zilei editor who monitored the census, told SETimes. 
"Second, the census workers ran into problems in the field they were not trained for. No one bothered to answer their questions. For instance, they did not know how and when to fine those who refused to answer, how to register their forms which were put together with those people not found at home," she said. 
"All these stammered messages downsized the importance of the census for the ordinary people, especially in its last days which saw a galloping and chaotic rhythm of collecting data." 
University of Bucharest Sociology Professor Vasile Ghetau, who also heads the Romanian Academy of Science's Demographic Centre, explained to SETimes that the census was expected to be the most difficult one ever because of three reasons. 
 "A new EC methodology, an atmosphere of social and economic crisis, with extra tension because of political instability and a perceived dissolution of the state institutions' authority," Ghetau said. 
Though the data are not yet centralised, Ghetau said it is an expected decline in Romania's population, one that is more significant than in the previous 2002 census which counted 21.6 million Romanians. 
"The external migration is an essential component in the population decrease, prompted by Romania's current economic and social situation: low income, unemployment, high cost of living, uncertainty, legislative instability, corruption and excessive politisation of institutions," he said. 
Next are the natural factors, a mortality rate higher than the birth rate, Ghetau added. 
To stimulate the birth rate amid this difficult economic context is a grave error, Ghetau argues, but once the crisis is over, authorities should analyse these factors and build programmes to address the demographic situation in the long run. 
According to the UN forecasts, at the current fertility rate of 1.3 children per woman, Romania's population will decrease to 16 million by 2050 and to 8 million by 2100. 
