09/03/2005
By Lundrim Aliu for Southeast European Times in Pristina - 09/03/05
Former Kosovo Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj left for The Hague on Wednesday (9 March) to face war crimes charges brought by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). He resigned Tuesday after receiving the tribunal's indictment. 
According to local reports, Haradinaj boarded a KFOR aircraft at around 11am Wednesday, accompanied by another former Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) member, Lah Brahimaj, who is believed to have been charged along with Haradinaj. 
Announcing his decision, the former prime minister called on Kosovo's people to preserve peace and implement standards set by the international community. "I want you to think of the primary interests of the nation," he said. 
Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova expressed hope that his coalition partner would be released and would one day continue to serve his people. He called for calm, highlighting the importance of security at this time. 
Haradinaj, who led operations in western Kosovo against Serbian security forces during the 1998-1999 conflict, denied any wrongdoing. "I am not responsible for what I am being accused of, and I believe the court will prove this," he said. According to media reports, he has been charged in connection with the killing of 20 Serbian civilians near his military headquarters.
Haradinaj's decision to withdraw from his executive post won high praise from international officials. UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen said Haradinaj's decision to co-operate despite maintaining his innocence is a mark of Kosovo's "growing political maturity". 
"Thanks to Ramush Haradinaj's dynamic leadership, strong commitment and vision, Kosovo is today closer than ever before to achieving its aspirations in settling its future status. Personally, I am saddened to no longer be working with a close partner and friend," Jessen-Petersen said. 
In Washington, State Department spokesman Richard Boucher said the former prime minister's actions "demonstrate his deep concern for the future of Kosovo and its people". He urged all countries of the former Yugoslavia to arrest and extradite war crimes suspects as a condition for their integration into the Euro-Atlantic institutions. 
Britain's Minister for Europe Denis MacShane, meanwhile, said Haradinaj's surrender sends a message to the indictees who continue to hide. 
KFOR Commander General Yves de Kermabon joined the appeals for peaceful acceptance of the indictment. An additional 500 British soldiers were rushed to Kosovo on Tuesday. "Everything will be done to keep all events under the control. …We will be able to react depending on the situation," de Kermabon said. 
Haradinaj, who celebrated his 100th day as prime minister on Tuesday, was focusing on Kosovo's goal of achieving standards set by the UN -- a prerequisite for opening discussions on final status. Talks could start at the end of the year, provided a review of the progress achieved is positive. 
Deputy Prime Minister Adem Salihaj will temporarily take over the prime minister's duties. According to media reports, current Urban Planning Minister Bajram Kosumi is considered most likely to replace Haradinaj in the long term. 
