05/08/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/08/11
With NATO peacekeepers taking charge of disputed border control points, the crisis in Kosovo's north has abated for the time being. But the long-term issues remain, experts say, with little sign that Belgrade and Pristina can reach an agreement. 
A lack of rule of law is the major contributing factor to the crisis in Kosovo's north, the commander of KFOR said in a recent interview with German media. Multiethnic criminal gangs, composed of ethnic Albanians as well as Serbs, have been allowed free rein. 
"For these structures, radical and criminal, it is about maintaining power. It's about money, and they are the ones who really have the say in the north today," General Erhard Bühler told the German newspaper Tagesspiegel. "These are the ones that control the armed forces that control the roadblocks and pay the people who stand guard at roadblocks. And basically they take the peace-loving population in the north as a sort of hostage." 
Although representatives sent by Belgrade reached an agreement with KFOR that paves the way for the removal of barricades and the restoration of free movement, analysts say the deal is only a temporary measure that does not resolve the larger issues. 
"It may provide comfort on the ground, but does not provide a solution to the northern political problem," political commentator Fatlum Sadiku told SETimes. 
A lasting solution can only be achieved through dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, analysts say -- a dialogue that has had problems getting off the ground. 
"Dialogue is a necessity and no one has the opportunity escape from this process," said Ramadan Ilazi, executive director of the FOL Movement in Pristina. "But the dialogue [so far] has never been between Kosovo and Serbia, but rather was a dialogue of Belgrade and Pristina with the European Union." 
Hampering the effort, however, is the fact that Belgrade and Pristina have radically different assumptions about the future of northern Kosovo, with its predominantly Serb demographic. While the government of Kosovo is intent on bringing the area under its authority, local Serb communities remain opposed to such a plan -- and Belgrade, which has vowed never to recognise Kosovo as an independent state -- continues to back them. 
According to Ilazi, the Ahtisaari Plan offers the best long-term hope for the north. It has been proven to be sustainable solution, he says, because Serbs in the southern parts of Kosovo are able to live with it. 
"This plan has been a success in the integration and development of the Serbian community which was living in the ghetto in the South, and the examples of Strpce, Gracanica and other municipalities that have accepted the plan clearly demonstrate an improvement in the quality of their life," he said. 
Sadiku, meanwhile, is convinced that the integration of the north will happen when "rule of law exists there and criminal and radical gangs are fought". 
With both Serbia and Kosovo aspiring to eventual EU membership, Brussels has attempted to steer the focus towards the long-term picture, urging both sides to get back to the negotiating table. 
"The EU underlines the need to return to the dialogue and to resolve the underlying issues without delay. The EU expects to see rapid and substantive progress on this," said Michael Mann, spokesperson for the bloc's foreign policy chief, Catherine Ashton. 
"We hope that a pragmatic and de-escalating interim solution that is acceptable to all parties can be found as soon as possible," Mann added. 
