25/09/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 25/09/06
Last week was one of the most important so far in resolving the status of Kosovo. Members of the Contact Group and the UN Security Council both met to discuss the future of the province, which has been under UN administration since 1999. 
The Contact Group consists of the United States, Russia, Great Britain, France, Italy, and Germany. At its 20 September session, the group gave Martti Ahtisaari, the UN envoy for the Kosovo status talks, the go-ahead to start making proposals on the province's status. 
The members also confirmed their determination "to see all possible efforts made in order to reach a solution through negotiations in 2006". They said the eventual solution must "strengthen regional stability, be acceptable for the Kosovo people and preserve the territory's multiethnic character". 
However, Russia and the Western partners still differ as to whether the end of 2006 is the ultimate deadline for the end of the negotiations. Russian officials previously have said they are against "artificially imposed deadlines" for the status solution, and Russian President Vladimir Putin recently said his country has not ruled out using its veto power. 
According to Putin, Russia is concerned that the example of Kosovo could affect other conflicts, such as in Southern Ossetia and Abkhazia. 
Ahtisaari disagrees. According to the UN envoy, crises around the world have different causes, and specific solutions must be found to each one. 
Russia's stance has been welcomed by Serbia, with Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica suggesting it means Moscow backs Belgrade's bid to retain sovereignty over the province. "Serbia will appreciate and remember this support from Russia," Kostunica said. 
But Serbian President Boris Tadic, who attended the meetings in New York, acknowledged that the Russian vote was the lone one in the Contact Group. "We (Serbia) can be moderate optimists. The situation has been complicated by the opinion of a number of Contact Group members, and that opinion veers towards conditional independence, which we strongly oppose," he said. 
Kosovo officials, meanwhile, said that independence for the province has support both within the Contact Group and the Security Council. Addressing the Council, President Fatmir Sejdiu urged that the issue be settled by the end of this year. 
"I talked about the current movements in Kosovo and the most important thing for us -- defining Kosovo's status … expressing our political vision that Kosovo's independence is what is fully in line with the political will of the Kosovo people," Sejdiu told TV Kosova. 
After the meeting in New York, Ahtisaari said that there were no defined deadlines for the Kosovo talks. He also warned "no one will be allowed to block the negotiating process." 
The UN envoy, whose mandate ends in November, did not say when he would present his proposals on Kosovo. UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker, however, said he hoped it would be a matter of weeks. 
