19/12/2005
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 12/19/05
After four years on the run, Ante Gotovina is behind bars in The Hague. He was seized by Spanish police on 7 December while dining in a hotel restaurant on Tenerife. The retired general, wanted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) for allegedly overseeing war crimes committed during a 1995 August offensive by the Croatian Army, was carrying a fake passport bearing the name Kristijan Horvat. He surrendered without resistance. 
With his arrest, the key political obstacle on Croatia's road to EU membership has disappeared. Despite receiving official EU candidate status, membership talks were derailed for months because of his continued fugitive status, even as the Croatian government insisted it was doing all it could to find him. 
With Gotovina's seizure, two of the three top ICTY indictees now remain at large. The news is likely to produce intensified efforts to bring about the arrest or surrender of Bosnian Serb indictees Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, who continue to pose a serious problem for the accession hopes of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia-Montenegro. Bringing all three men to justice at The Hague would do much to close the bloody legacy of conflict in the former Yugoslavia and foster reconciliation. 
 Addressing parliament a day after the capture, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said it had boosted Croatia's international credibility, demonstrating the truth of Zagreb's claims that Gotovina was not in the country. With this epilogue, doubts about Croatia's co-operation with the ICTY could finally be put to rest, he said. 
Sanader also stressed the importance of the rule of law -- one of the basic principles, he said, on which Croatia was established. A constitutional law requiring co-operation with the Hague tribunal was adopted in 1996. 
No one should consider themselves above or beyond the law, and anyone who faces charges has an obligation to appear in court and answer them, Sanader said. At the same time, there is a presumption of innocence until and unless guilt is proven. That is true in every case, including Gotovina's, he said. 
The crimes for which Gotovina stands accused stem from Croatia's efforts to retake the Krajina region from Serb separatists who seized it in 1991. Operation Storm ("Oluja") lasted from 4 August until 7 August 1995 and succeeded in putting an end to the so-called "Repubic of Serbian Krajina". In the process, however, severe violations of humanitarian law took place. Up to 200,000 Krajina Serbs were reportedly displaced as a result of the offensive and follow-up actions. Gotovina, who was then commander of the Split Operative Zone of the Croatian Army, has been charged with bearing individual and command responsibility for the persecution, killing, maltreatment and deportation of Serbs, the destruction of villages, and the looting of assets. 
 Furthermore, UN prosecutors have charged that the crimes were part of a joint criminal enterprise whose goal was the removal of Serbs from the Krajina region. Gotovina is accused of having collaborated in this scheme together with former President Franjo Tudjman and two other men, Ivan Cermak and Mladen Markac. 
The indictment also says that representatives of international organisations reported to Gotovina about violations of international humanitarian law committed by people under his command, but that he did nothing to halt the violations or punish the perpetrators. The ICTY also holds him individually responsible for the unlawful killings of at least 150 Krajina Serbs. 
The initial ICTY charges against Gotovina were brought in 2001. He vanished shortly before they were made public, reportedly with the collusion of supporters within the Croatian government. An amended indictment was subsequently filed by the UN court. He soon appeared on the Interpol most-wanted list and an international all-points-bulletin. The United States offered a reward of $5m for the information about his whereabouts. 
In 2004, a Croatian newsmagazine published an interview conducted with Gotovina in a secret location. In it, the former general acknowledged the legitimacy of the ICTY and claimed he was ready to talk to Hague investigators about his role in the Croatian war of independence, alleging that the government had blocked his earlier efforts to do so. Meanwhile, rumours swirled about his possible connection with the criminal underworld, which some suspect of having channeled the funds needed to sustain his life on the run. The noose appears to have been tightening since September, and there has been speculation linking his apprehension to the earlier arrest in Greece of business tycoon Hrvoje Petrac, said to have possessed information about the general's choice of hideout. 
At the same time, Croatians are puzzled by the circumstances of the arrest. Tenerife is a crowded, popular summer destination; moving in public among the swarms of vacationers, Gotovina stood a high chance of being recognised. His passport used a name which was on the Interpol all-points bulletin, and he had made no apparent effort to disguise his appearance. 
Reaction in Croatia was mixed. Polls taken after the arrest found that 46.6 per cent of Croatians oppose it, 28 per cent support it and 25.44 per cent have no opinion. Gotovina supporters, however, have been vocal in their reaction, taking to the streets in droves to express support for the indictee and vent anger against the government. In the coastal city of Split, some 70,000 reportedly took to the streets to protest Gotovina's capture. 
Politicians voiced a spectrum of opinion. Croatian Party of the Right President Anto Djapic bemoaned what he described as a sad day for Croatia and expressed confidence that Gotovina would prove his innocence, while Croatian Peasant Party deputy president Ljubica Lalic said that all of Croatia is on trial along with Gotovina. By contrast, former Prime Minister Ivica Racan said that, with the arrest, an unresolved chapter is closer to being closed. Vice President of the Serbian Democratic Party Milorad Puopovac said it was very significant news not only for Croatia but the whole region. With Gotovina's apprehension, the process of bringing all the fugitive war crimes indictees is under way, he said. 
