11/10/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 11/10/05
A sixth Albanian army contingent bound for duty in Iraq was seen off Sunday (9 October) during a departure ceremony at a command centre north of Tirana. Addressing the peacekeepers, Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu assured them their mission is a noble one. 
"The important aspect of your mission consists of your priority: to contribute to the security of the peace in the world," Mediu said. 
Composed of 120 specially trained officers, non-commissioned officers, and professional soldiers, the new contingent will replace the fifth one, which is part of the US-led coalition forces in Mosul, northern Iraq. Albania sent the first contingent to Iraq in April 2003 and has rotated it every six months since then. 
US Ambassador Marcie Ries also spoke at the ceremony. The war against terrorism is a response to threats everyone faces, as violent extremists have targeted the whole globe, Ries said. 
"Those who use terrorism must be made to understand that we -- the United States, Albania, and all members of the coalition -- represent the ideals to which the vast majority of humanity aspires. The great diversity in our coalition in Iraq demonstrates the broad strength of our core values -- democracy, freedom, and the opportunity for a better life," Ries said. 
She added that the United States remains extremely grateful for Albania's contributions in Iraq, Afghanistan and Bosnia and Herzegovina. In committing to such deployments, she said, Albania is not only a part of the greatest and most crucial cause of the time, but is also working for positive change globally and regionally, while at the same time strengthening ties with the United States. 
Last month, the US Embassy announced that Albania has been granted $8m by Washington in recognition of its role in international peacekeeping and the global war on terror. The money is being provided through the US Coalition Solidarity Fund and President George W. Bush's Global Peacekeeping Operations Initiative. 
Albania is also actively seeking integration into NATO. Together with Croatia and Macedonia, the country is part of a US-backed initiative known as the Adriatic Charter, meant to co-ordinate efforts to achieve Euro-Atlantic integration. 
