08/03/2011
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 08/03/11
"There are a number of ways to rate a success of a festival, but the most important is how the audience responds to films," says Nenad Puhovski, director of ZagrebDox. 
 Speaking at the closing ceremony on Saturday (March 5th), he expressed his pleasure that the festival audience gave the movies that were screened an average rating of 4 [out of 5]. 
"This makes us proud and I would like to thank the audience for that," he said. 
Now in its seventh year, ZagrebDox is now one of the most highly regarded regional documentary festivals. It screened documentaries at the Movieplex Cinema Theatre from February 27th till March 6th (Monday), with viewers filling up the theatre daily and enjoying over 100 films that portrayed different stories, places and people. 
 "Of course, I went to see as many films as possible with my friends. Documentaries are not like commercial movies, they show the reality as is," Ivan Radic, 29, told SETimes. 
He attended the Movieplex regularly during the week of the ZagrebDox. "It is the best way to spend an afternoon or evening," he added, entering the theatre. 
ZagrebDox hosted a number of foreign directors who came to Zagreb for the screening of their film. They include American filmmaker Cathryn Collins whose film Vlast [Power] tells the story of imprisoned Russian oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky. 
Collins, a successful business woman with a designer company in New York, said she felt the need to do something about the case and show the circumstances which led to Khodorkovsky's jailing. 
One of the most talked about documentaries, Once Brothers, recounts the relationship between the two biggest basketball stars of former Yugoslavia -- Vlade Divac, a Serb, and Croatian basketball prodigy Drazen Petrovic -- who played for the Yugoslav national team and later in the NBA league. Their friendship ended with the dissolution of the former Yugoslavia. 
 "I wanted to show how I felt and I am sorry that all these words I will never be able to say to Drazen," Divac said at the opening night screening of the film. 
Petrovic died in a car accident in 1993. The screening of Once Brothers was attended by Petrovic's mother, Biserka, and former teammates such as Dino Radja. 
The main award, the International Competition Big Stamp, went to Dutch moviemaker Leonard Retel Helmrich for his film Position Among the Stars, which won a special award at the 2011 Sundance Film Festival. 
The documentary, a trilogy, developed over a decade, traces the life of a working family in Jakarta slums. 
Vladimir Perovic, from Montenegro, received the regional Big Stamp award for his Trials, Tribulations and Sustainable Growth of a Cock. 
 Croatian film and TV critic, Dragan Jurak, and a member of the ZagrebDox jury, said that Perovic's film is "about the macho culture from the point of the view of a cock, which is also a symbol of machismo. It is a simple, but impressive film, with no dialogue or comments, but with a strong cultural touch". 
 The Small Stamp, an award for the best film directed by someone under 30 years of age, went to the young Polish director Piotr Zlotorowicz for his film Charcoal Burners. 
A Serbian film, Run for Life, received the Movies That Matter award for a film about three Ethiopian athletes who came to Serbia in search for a better life. Director Mladen Maticevic traces the story until their departure a year and a half later. 
