26/07/2007
(B92 - 26/07/07; DPA, AP, AFP, Reuters, Deutsche Welle, BBC, VOA, UPI, Beta, B92 - 25/07/07)
The Contact Group members agreed on Wednesday (July 25th) that a troika, comprised of EU, US and Russian envoys, will mediate the new Kosovo status talks between Belgrade and Pristina. 
Representatives of the six nations making up the group -- Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States -- reached that decision during a closed-door meeting at the German embassy in Vienna. 
Last week, Western nations decided to shelve a draft UN Security Council resolution on Kosovo in the face of a potential Russian veto. The document -- based on former UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's plan for EU-supervised independence -- sets a 120-day deadline for the new talks between Serbian and Kosovo Albanian leaders. 
Russia, which has been threatening to block any UN resolution that is not acceptable to Belgrade, is pushing for open-ended negotiations. 
Thirteen months of previous talks led by Ahtisaari and his deputy, Albert Rohan, failed to bring the Serbian and Kosovo Albanian sides closer to an agreement. Serbia, which insists that Kosovo is an inalienable part of its territory, says it is prepared to grant the province substantial autonomy. But Kosovo Albanians, who account for around 90% of the province's population of 2 million, say they will not settle for anything less than full independence. 
No official statement has been issued on the Contact Group's meeting, but reports say the negotiations process will reopen in August or September with shuttle diplomacy between Belgrade and Pristina. It is not yet known if a deadline would be set for the talks, or if the issue will be referred back to the UN afterwards. 
During a meeting in Brussels on Monday, EU foreign ministers called on Belgrade and Pristina "to engage actively and seriously" in the new negotiations. 
UNMIK chief Joachim Ruecker, who attended the meeting, returned to Pristina on Wednesday, saying he had warned the EU diplomats about the dangers of further delaying a settlement. 
"I stressed that there is a lot of anxiety and tension and people need and deserve clarity on status and also on the status process," he told reporters in Pristina. "It would be very helpful if we had something like a roadmap or timetable on the way forward, something more than just an announcement of the time of engagement." 
Initial expectations were that the issue of Kosovo's final status would be resolved by the end of 2006. The setbacks and delays in the process have fuelled frustration among the Kosovo Albanians, with some calling for the province to unilaterally declare itself a sovereign state. 
Given the current disagreements, US State Department spokesman Sean McCormack appeared sceptical Wednesday about the prospects of a deal. 
"It would be optimal if we could get full agreement on it," the Voice of America quoted him as saying."I think given where we are in the diplomacy, it's unlikely that we will get full agreement." 
McCormack also warned of the potential for destabilisation if Kosovo is not granted independence. 
"It's not good for Europe," McCormack said. "It's not good for us. We have an interest in seeing that region be more stable." 
