12/06/2007
By Georgi Mitev-Santek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 12/06/07
The trophies went to Nadal and Henin, but for a time this year's French Open looked like Serbia's tournament. Not only did 19-year-old Ana Ivanovic become the first Serbian player to represent her country in a top tennis final, but two other singles players -- Novak Djokovic and Jelena Jankovic -- finished in the semifinals. Meanwhile, Nenad Zimonjic teamed up again with Slovenia's Katarina Srebotnik in mixed doubles. 
 Ivanovic's inexperience finally caught up with her, and she presented few problems for Justine Henin, who beat her 6-1, 6-2. Still, she had a great tournament, vanquishing Maria Sharapova in two sets, and now ranks 6th on the WTA list. Ivanovic's career started in Belgrade, where lack of adequate facilities obliged her to train in an emptied swimming pool. She is a born tactician who goes for the shots -- in the match against Sharapova she served 31 aces. Forehand and serve are her strongest weapons, along with a lethal return. 
 Before dispatching Ivanovic, Henin beat Jelena Jankovic (6-2, 6-2) with what the latter described as "flawless" play. Jankovic can take consolation, however, in rising to third on the WTA list. She has won three titles ths year, including the Italian Open. Last year Jankovic almost quit tennis, saying she was no longer enjoying it, but now insists she is "ready to be number one". 
In the men's singles, Djokovic put up a spirited fight against the eventual tournament winner, Rafel Nadal, but faltered in the third set (7-5 ,6-4, 6-2). Although he did not become the first Serbian man to win a grand slam, he has a lot to be proud of -- having won three titles this year, he's now third on the WTA list. His strength is the lack of any particular weakness. He has a good forehand and backhand, and excellent tactical instincts. Now is he getting ready to go after his dream -- winning Wimbledon. 
"I turned 20 two weeks ago and I have had incredible results for my age. I see myself as one of the best players in the world," Djokovic said at a press conference. "I showed to myself and to everybody else I have enough quality to be in the top three and four in the world. I'll just try to do my best and go forward." Few doubt his ability to pose a long-term challenge to the dominant names in men's singles, Federer and Nadal. 
 In mixed doubles, Zimonjic and Srebotnik were the defending champions, but proved unable to pull off a repeat. They were upset 7-5, 6-3 by Nathalie Dechy and Andy Ram, making their debut as a team. 
With the tournament over, the tennis world remains enthralled with the strong showing by players from the small Balkan country with a troubled history. Their performance came despite serious obstacles, most importantly the lack of proper training conditions. Indeed, it is hard to believe that young Serbian players have been able to shake up the world of tennis -- coming, as they do, from a country without a single grass court. 
Bringing their play up to speed has meant spending considerable time abroad. Djokovic has trained in Germany, Italy and now Monte Carlo. Jankovic is in the United States and Ivanovic in Switzerland. All the players made it clear that their parents have played a major role in their success. Moms and dads act as sponsors and managers, providing their own money, conections and support. 
Meanwhile, the Serbs are making their home country proud. Perhaps their success at Roland Garros this year will help spur construction of a modern tennis centre in Belgrade -- a project agreed on by municipal authorites and the Serbian Tennis Associatoin last year. 
