20/04/2005
(Office of the High Representative Web Site -- 19/04/05 - 20/04/05; Fena, Onasa - 19/04/05)
High Representative Paddy Ashdown urged politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Tuesday (19 April) to reach a compromise on police reform, a critical precondition for the country's EU integration progress. 
"Police reform remains the last great obstacle to be overcome before BiH can start negotiating its own Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA)," Ashdown said during a meeting with the leaderships of both houses of the Federation of BiH Parliament. The meeting came just days before the 24 April start of political negotiations on restructuring the country's police forces. 
A consultative task force of the European Commission (EC) is due to arrive in BiH in mid-May to assess BiH's progress in meeting 16 requirements outlined in its feasibility study. A positive assessment would open the way for the start of SAA negotiations, a key first step towards eventual EU membership. 
According to Ashdown, most of the issues and problems on the agenda had been resolved, "including the fact that we can reach a constructive co-operation" with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague. But he stressed that the go-ahead for SAA talks could come only after all preconditions are met. 
BiH's leaders must "reach a formal agreement on police reform, or be responsible for the delay in fulfilling BiH's EU accession ambitions," Ashdown said. 
The requirements Brussels has laid out for police reform include placing exclusive competence for police legislation and budget at the state level, removing political interference from operational policing, and ensuring that policing is carried out on the basis of functional criteria. 
"If we succeed, these negotiations will provide BiH with a decent system of policing, one which can win the battle against crime, rather than losing it," said Ashdown. "If we fail then we condemn BiH to remain in Europe's backwaters. This is not a decision I can impose -- it is one you must agree on." 
Referring to the EC's positive feasibility study for Serbia-Montenegro last week, the British diplomat also noted that this was a clear signal that EU membership, rather than the destructive politics of the past, had become the priority for BiH's neighbours. 
"BiH's leading political cadres -- in both government and opposition -- now have an opportunity to prove to the citizens of this country that they too are intent on reaching this goal and that they are capable of leading BiH into Europe," Ashdown was quoted as saying. 
Police reform was also one of the issues the EUPM Commissioner in BiH, Kevin Carty, discussed Tuesday with the head of the Brcko District Police, Milenko Milicevic, and members of the EUPM team operating there. 
"The reasons for police reform in BiH are clear," Carty said. "Current police forces in BiH are not functional and are under strong influence of various political parties." 
If the country wants to begin talks on its accession to the EU, it should restructure its police forces, the EUPM chief said. "Politicians in BiH have two possibilities -- either to accept the police restructuring or to close the door to Europe," he added. 
