11/07/2005
(Various sources -- 23/06/05 - 01/07/05)
Britain took over the EU rotating presidency on Friday (1 July). It did so amid one of the worst crises in the bloc's 50-year history, following the French and Dutch rejections of the proposed constitution and the European leaders' failure in mid-June to reach an agreement on the 2007-2013 budget. 
A budget deal, economic reform and external relations will be key issues on Downing Street's agenda during the six-month British chairmanship. The fourth key area of work will be "pursuing the EU's commitments on enlargement," according to the White Paper on the prospects for the EU during the second half of 2005 that British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw published on 30 June. 
Amid increasing calls for a halt in the further expansion of the Union, British Prime Minister Tony Blair has sought to convince others about the potential benefits of the process. 
Addressing the European Parliament on 23 June, he said economic reform, coupled with steps to improve security "within our borders and beyond", would boost Europe's confidence. "It would be a Europe confident enough to see enlargement not as a threat ... but [as] an extraordinary, historic opportunity to build a greater and more powerful union," said Blair. 
Bulgaria and Romania, which signed their accession treaties with the EU on 24 April, are scheduled to join the Union in January 2007. But each still needs to fulfil a number of commitments before becoming full-fledged members. "If either country is unprepared to meet the requirements of membership, the EU can push back accession by one year," the White Paper said. 
Securing a negotiating mandate for the accession talks with Turkey, which are scheduled to begin on 3 October, is expected to be the most challenging task on the British EU presidency's agenda in the area of enlargement. "The EU and Turkey alike stand to gain greatly from a democratic and prospering Turkey anchored in Europe, a demonstration that Islam is compatible with the values of liberal democracy, which form the bedrock of the EU," Straw said. 
London is also expected to push Croatia to make greater efforts to apprehend and extradite fugitive war crimes indictee Ante Gotovina so that accession negotiations -- originally scheduled for March, but delayed because of the Gotovina issue -- can begin. 
As to Macedonia's application for EU membership, Straw's office said that the European Commission was assessing it and would likely issue its opinion this autumn. 
