10/11/2009
By HK Tzanis for Southeast European Times in Athens – 10/11/09
Sunday's (November 8th) Athens Classic Marathon was a dress rehearsal for next year's race, which will commemorate the 2,500th anniversary of the landmark Battle of Marathon. The event also coincides with the race being upgraded to the International Athletics Federation's (IAAF) "golden league". 
At this year's marathon, Kenyans swept the men's side, with Josephat Kipkurui crossing the finish line with a time of 2:13:44, followed by countrymen Edwin Kipchom (2:14:18) and Mutuki Pius Muasa (2:14:29) in third place. Japan's Akemi Ozaki won the women's side with a time of 2:39:56, followed by Ethiopia's Degefa Bruktayit Eshetu (2:40:32). 
More than 3,600 athletes from around the world set off from an outdoor ceremonial stadium in the rural municipality of Marathon -- northeast of Athens -- with the finish line at the Greek capital's Panathinaiko Stadium. 
 In addition to the classical Athens Marathon, there was also a men's and women's 5,000m and 10,000m race held at Panathinaiko Stadium, as well as a special 1,000m event at the Temple of the Olympian Zeus archaeological site for Special Olympics athletes. 
The classical course more-or-less follows the legendary route military courier Pheidippides took to Athens in 490 BC to herald the Athenian army's victory over the invading Persian army at the Battle of Marathon. 
Viewed within the context of a projected slump in the all-important domestic tourism sector for 2009 -- estimates run as high as a 10% decline in tourist arrivals -- the marathon is increasingly eyed as an "off-season" boost for the country. 
 "One of our primary goals is for the world's millions of long-distance runners and joggers to at least, once in their lifetimes, travel to Greece and participate in this race, to run along the authentic marathon course; in essence, a pilgrimage of sorts to the classical marathon route," Vassilis Sevastis, the head of Greece's athletics federation (SEGAS), said on Friday. 
SEGAS, Greece's oldest sports federation, and local government officials made every effort to boost the "value-added" symbolism of Sunday's 42,195m race, holding a flame-lighting ceremony and vigil at the nearby Marathon tumulus -- the site where ancient Athens' fallen hoplites are buried -- and inaugurating a new museum to showcase the modern marathon's history since the revival of the Olympics in 1896. 
"This [marathon] is the only Olympic sport that has a toponym, and the only one linked with a famous ancient battle that symbolises the fight for liberty and democracy. Scholars have long said that the quintessence of Western civilisation would not have materialised if it wasn't for this historic battle," Marathon Mayor Spyros Zagaris said at a press conference in central Athens' Zappeion Hall. 
