04/06/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 04/06/09
Kosovo authorities imposed a June 30th return-to-work deadline for about 250 Kosovo Serb police. They walked off their jobs months ago, refusing to serve under the Kosovo Police Service (KPS). 
KPS spokesperson Arber Beka told Southeast European Times last month that 43 Serb police officers have returned to the force since Pristina issued the ultimatum to either report to work or get fired. "We expect the majority to return, but they have until June 30th. If they do not … their work contracts will be canceled," said Beka. 
Serbian State Secretary for Kosovo Oliver Ivanovic said "there is no willingness for Serbs to integrate into the KPS without any limitations." He told the Serbian daily Politika that there is a need for intermediaries at every level, not a separate chain of command. 
"A slight separation from the institutions [that] will enable us to work, but not have that unpleasant feeling that we are a part of independent state institutions," said Ivanovic. 
He suggests a EULEX representative would be responsible "for the co-ordination of Serb officers in municipal and regional police stations", and "EULEX should be …initiating contact with Serb authorities." 
Ivanovic cautioned that "this return must not happen chaotically or spontaneously." In a statement to radio and TV network B92, he emphasised the importance of "international representatives in Kosovo … EULEX at this point, to carefully approach and enable … possible integration of Serbs into Kosovo police". 
Last month, KPS Deputy Commissioner Sheremet Ahmeti assured that the request for police to integrate into the KPS is sincere. 
However, Ahmeti reiterated that the June 30th deadline is approaching. "We are determined and obliged to respect the deadline set by the Kosovo Interior Ministry, which means that after June 30th ... we will be forced to cancel their contracts," said Ahmeti. 
The interior ministry says Serb officers who return by the deadline will not be subject to disciplinary action. 
