14/04/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 14/04/11
Breaking up an al-Qaeda cell in the country, Turkish anti-terror police arrested more than 40 people in dozens of raids on Tuesday (April 12th), mainly in Istanbul. 
"This is one of the routine, but very effective, operations conducted by the Turkish police," a government official told SETimes. 
Halis Bayancuk, 26, considered one of the ringleaders of al-Qaeda in Turkey, is among the detained. He is thought to have formerly belonged to the Hizbullah organisation, which has no links to the Lebanese Shi'ite group of the same name. His father, Hacı Bayancuk, is suspected of being the mastermind behind the 2001 murder of Diyarbakir Police Chief Ali Gaffar Okkan and five other policemen. 
Halis Bayancuk was detained in 2008 for leading a terrorist group, but was released in 2009. 
 Police found evidence that suspects established Sharia courts at home and did not allow their children to attend the secular schools. After monitoring physical and wire activities of the group, the investigators concluded that members were planning to organise massive terrorist acts. 
Sedat Laciner, a terrorism expert and head of the Ankara-based International Strategic Research Organisation, believes authorities have been tracking Halis Bayancuk and his associates for a long time. 
 "As a rule, when the danger is the highest, the police stop following them and start raids," he told SETimes. 
Al-Qaeda is believed to have been behind several high-profile attacks in Istanbul, including four truck bombs in November 2003, targeting the British Consulate, the Turkish headquarters of HSBC bank and two synagogues, killing 57 people and wounding hundreds. 
Police have accelerated regular operations against the militant group since July 2008, when three policemen and three assailants died in a gun battle outside the US consulate. 
 In January 2010, 120 alleged members of al-Qaeda were detained in Istanbul and other cities, possibly including senior members. There were similar raids in 2009. 
"There are other possible links to al-Qaeda that can be found in our country," Laciner believes. 
 Until recently al-Qaeda was off the radar for many Turks, argues Sinan Ogan, chairman of the Turkish Centre for International Relations and Strategic Analysis. 
 "This week's operations showed us that the terrorists are more professional and quiet than we imagined," he told SETimes, urging the government to keep its eyes open. Ogan is a parliamentary candidate for the right-wing National Movement Party. 
Memet Yılmaz Helvacioglu, deputy chairman of parliament's National Security Commission, says the administration's efforts are on the right track, despite opposition criticism. 
 "We are doing our best and this is not only Turkey's problem," he said. As a regional Muslim leader and Western ally, Ankara has strong credentials when it comes to fighting terrorism, he added. 
