02/04/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori and Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 02/04/13 
The lack of the inclusion of Kosovo Serbs in the EU-mediated talks between Pristina and Belgrade is sparking worries that the minority group is not being fairly treated, and analysts said the negotiations need to be transparent. 
Bogdana Koljevic, editor of the New Serbian Political Thought, told SETimes that it was clear from the start of the negotiations that Kosovo Serbs were insufficiently informed about the progress of the talks, in which they participated as passive observers, not as active citizens whose lives are the focus of the talks. 
"A solution that [south Kosovo Serbs] refuse to accept, or see as their legitimate right, can hardly be a sustainable solution. If they perceive themselves as undervalued and ignored, it may spark more restlessness among them," Koljevic said. 
After each meeting, the EU issued press statements without releasing details on the agreements reached in the dialogue. 
"Current … negotiations are done away from the eye of the public, and lack of information and uncertainty prevail throughout Serbia, which make people unhappy, and which could create an even bigger problem, even if Serbia wins in the negotiation process," Koljevic said. 
Rada Trajkovic of the Unique Serbian List told SETimes that lack of transparency in the negotiations could create a new gulf between the Albanians and Serbs. 
"It's normal to sacrifice something in the negotiation process, which doesn't have to be the focus of the negotiations, but everything must be discussed publicly. Without open talks … both sides will become more introverted," Trajkovic said. 
Liridon Krasniqi, researcher at the Kosovo Centre for European Policy Studies, agreed that Belgrade and Pristina should have included Serbs from south Kosovo in the talks. 
"[Negotiations as they are now] create two groups of Serbs, those from the north who follow Belgrade and for which Belgrade is seeking more autonomy, and those in the south to which Belgrade is not even signalling what it wants from them," Krasniqi said. 
Anxiety and fear over changes prevail over Kosovo Serbs at the moment that could potentially worsen the situation, said Oliver Ivanovic, president of the civil initiative Serbia, Democracy, Justice, and the former state secretary of the Serbian ministry for Kosovo and Metohija. 
"Lack of information over the negotiations is crucial for people, and is a way of spreading misinformation. People must be informed directly about the process, not via media … and take part in the process, that's the only solution," Ivanovic told SETimes. 
Ramadan Ilazi, executive director of Kosovo Peace Institute, told SETimes that the negotiations on northern Kosovo undermine the progress in integrating the rest of the Kosovo Serb community, and that the solution for the north, whatever the outcome, will have a major impact on the Serbs in the rest of Kosovo. 
"If the north becomes autonomous, it may cause an influx of Kosovo Serbs to the north, a discrimination or unequal treatment of the Serbs of the north and those living in the rest of Kosovo, and a weak political representation of Serb community in the rest of Kosovo," Ilazi said. 
Will including all Kosovo Serbs in the Belgrade-Pristina negotiations open transparency of the process? Tell us by making a comment below. 
