22/10/2008
(AP, UN News Centre, UNobserver, B92, International Court of Justice - 21/10/08; B92 - 19/10/08; EMportal - 17/10/08)
The International Court of Justice (ICJ) has given UN member nations six months to submit their views on Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence, according to an order published on Tuesday (October 21st). 
In an October 8th vote, the General Assembly approved a Serbian resolution requesting the UN top legal body's advisory opinion on whether the secession complied with international law. 
A week after receiving the resolution, the ICJ, also known as the World Court, decided on Friday that the UN and its member states are "likely to be able to furnish information" on that question and asked them to submit their written statements by April 17th. It also set July 17th "as the time-limit within which states and organisations having presented written statements may submit written comments on the other statements". 
Kosovo authorities can "make written contributions to the court" defending their declaration of independence. The ICJ announced on Tuesday that it would invite them to participate in its proceedings as well. 
Kosovo has set up a legal team, headed by Michael Wood, a British expert in international law, to represent its interests before the ICJ. 
"Wood is one of the most famous and competent lawyers of our time, and we are lucky that he is prepared to represent our case," President Fatmir Sejdiu's office said last week. "We have great confidence in his stands and experience." 
It is not clear yet how the court plans to proceed after July. According to Tuesday's press release, "the subsequent procedure was reserved for further decision." 
Established in 1945, the ICJ has two main functions: to settle legal disputes between states and render advisory opinions on legal questions referred to it by UN bodies and specialised agencies. In the first case, the court delivers a verdict that is binding and cannot be appealed. 
In the second case, the advisory opinions on issues such as Kosovo's independence declaration have no binding effect. Therefore, the 51 countries that have recognised Europe's newest state thus far will not be obliged to reverse themselves, even if the ICJ should judge that Kosovo's unilateral move in February broke international law. 
Aside from Serbia, which remains staunchly opposed to its former province's secession, Bosnia and Herzegovina is the only former Yugoslav republic that has not recognised Kosovo as an independent state. 
