16/04/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -16/04/07
In a boost to Croatian-Serbian relations, a ferry route is being re-introduced across the Danube between Vukovar in Croatia and Vajska in Serbia, providing an easier connection to the Vojvodina town of Bac. 
The move has great symbolic significance. In 1991, Serbian forces shelled Vukovar heavily, during a prolonged siege that ended in its capture. More than a decade later, the city remains a potent reminder of the bloody years of conflict. A number of former Yugoslav Army soldiers, as well as members of Serbian paramilitary squads, are on trial for war crimes because of atrocities committed there. 
Thus, the Vukovar-Vajska route is both a milestone in terms of reconciliation, as well as an asset to local economies. 
 The ceremony marking the route's opening provided an opportunity for delegations from Croatia and Serbia to discuss future initiatives. 
 "We are neighbours and that's what we'll remain. History should be left to historians, and politicians should seek mutual possibilities and perspectives of co-operation," said Bojan Pajtic, the president of the Executive Committee of Vojvodina and the head of the Serbian delegation. 
 In 2006, trade between Croatia and Serbia amounted to only 188m euros, Pajtic said. "It is too low, and in the future trade exchange should be higher," he added. 
 The mayor of Vukovarsko-Srijemska County, Bozo Galic, led the Croatian delegation. Speaking to the press, he said his country and the northern Serbian region of Vojvodina should collaborate -- especially on projects related to EU programmes. 
 "Politicians should create best conditions for such collaboration," he said, noting that local chambers of commerce and businessmen already are working together. 
 In February, Vukovar Mayor Tomislav Sota travelled to Bac to sign an agreement on the ferry project with his Serbian counterpart, Tomislav Bogunovic. It marked the first time a Vukovar official has visited Serbia since the end of conflict in 1995. 
Introduction of the ferry is being assisted with about 1.5m euros in financing from the Dutch government, which is purchasing the actual ferryboat and handling maintenance responsibilities for one year. In advance of the boat's arrival, a temporary vessel is being used. 
