14/05/2008
(Euobserver, The Times, Zaman, The New Anatolian, Hurriyet - 14/05/08; AP, AFP, DPA, BBC, VOA - 13/05/08)
Stressing Turkey's strategic location as a bridge between Europe and Asia, Britain's Queen Elizabeth II voiced support for Ankara's EU bid Tuesday (May 13th) evening, shortly after she began her first official visit to the country in 37 years. 
 "For us, Turkey is as important now as it has ever been," the British monarch said at a banquet hosted by President Abdullah Gul. "Turkey is uniquely positioned as a bridge between East and West at a crucial time for the European Union and the world in general." 
 Britain is one of the staunchest supporters of Turkey's long-sought EU membership. An associate member since 1963, Turkey began its accession talks with the 27-nation bloc in October 2005, but only six of all 35 negotiation chapters have been opened since. Talks on another eight policy areas stalled in late 2006 after Ankara refused to open its ports and airports to traffic from Cyprus, whose Greek-run part joined the EU in 2004. 
Despite the accession-related hurdles Turkey faces, the public benefits from reforms Brussels seeks of EU candidates, according to the British monarch. 
"The prospect of accession to the European Union has already helped to inspire changes that are improving the lives of its citizens," she said. She also described Turkey as a "confident and dynamic democracy", and praised Ankara for its "key role in promoting peace, political stability and economic development in some of the world's most unsettled areas" and its close ties with London. Turkey and Spain are cosponsors of a UN-supported effort to increase dialogue between Western and non-Western cultures. 
 Gul thanked Britain for its "unwavering and permanent support" of his country's bid to join the EU. Gul's wife, Hayrunnisa, wore her headscarf despite a ban on such garments in government offices, including at events of this type. 
Queen Elizabeth II, who previously visited Turkey in 1960 and 1971, arrived in Ankara Tuesday afternoon, accompanied by her husband, Prince Philip, and Foreign Secretary David Miliband. 
Shortly after their arrival, the royal couple visited the mausoleum of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, the founder of modern Turkey, where the queen laid a wreath. 
Their four-day itinerary includes the historic northwestern city of Bursa on Wednesday, a school and museum in Istanbul on Thursday and a reception aboard a British warship stationed near that city. They leave Turkey on Friday. 
Nick Baird, the British ambassador to Turkey, told reporters that the royal trip "highlights the breadth and depth" of Anglo-Turkish relations and the "importance of Turkey to both the EU and the world". 
