25/04/2006
(Sofia Echo - 25/04/06; UN Office on Drugs and Crime, Washington File, UPI - 24/04/06; AP - 23/04/06)
Millions of people are being abducted or recruited every year for sexual exploitation or forced labour, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) said on Monday (24 April), stressing that virtually no country in the world is immune from the crime of human trafficking. 
The Vienna-based panel urged governments to step up their efforts in dealing with the global problem that affects mainly women and children. 
"The fact that this form of slavery still exists in the 21st century shames us all," UNODC Executive Director Antonio Maria Costa said upon the release of a new report, Trafficking In Persons: Global Patterns. "Governments need to get serious about identifying the full extent of the problem so they can get serious about eliminating it." 
The 128-page report represents the Vienna-based organisation's first attempt to analyse global human trafficking patterns on the basis of data from 113 different source institutions for the period 1996-2003. The paper lists countries on a 5-point scale from "very low" to "very high" as countries of origin, transit and destination. 
Albania, Bulgaria and Romania are among 11 countries ranked "very high" in the citation index of 127 countries of origin. Albania and Bulgaria, along with Hungary, Italy, Poland and Thailand, are also placed "very high" on the list of 98 transit countries. Bulgaria is a transit country for people trafficked from Romania, Moldova and the Russian Federation to Greece and Turkey, according to the UNODC report. 
Victims usually end up in one of 137 destination countries. High on the list of destinations are Belgium, Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Thailand, Turkey and the United States. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo rank "high" as regions of both transit and destination. 
The data provided by the different source institutions showed sexual exploitation as the main motive in more than 85 per cent of the reported cases of trafficking, with forced labour and forced removal of organs accounting for the remainder. 
Adult women are the most frequent victims followed by girls, boys and men, the UNODC said. Boys tend to be exploited for labour, while sexual exploitation is reported more frequently among girls. 
"It is extremely difficult to establish how many victims there are worldwide as the level of reporting varies considerably, but the number certainly runs into millions," said Costa. "It is difficult to name a country that is not affected in some way." 
Describing the efforts to counter trafficking in humans so far as "unco-ordinated and inefficient," the UNODC executive director cited the lack of systematic reporting by governments as a key problem. 
One of the three main challenges governments face in the fight against trafficking, according to Costa, is reducing demand, whether for cheap goods manufactured in sweatshops, under-priced commodities produced by bonded people in farms and mines, or services provided by sex slaves. The other two are targeting the criminals who profit from the vulnerability of people trying to escape from poverty, unemployment, hunger and oppression and protecting trafficking victims, especially women and children. 
"Traffickers capitalise on weak law enforcement and poor international co-operation," said Costa. "The low rate of convictions for the perpetrators of human trafficking is a matter of serious concern which needs to be addressed." 
