18/08/2010
By Esra Erduran for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 18/08/10
Time takes on a different rhythm in Turkey during the Holy Month of Ramadan, often called the "sultan of the months". Rush hour in the cities adapts to Iftar, the breaking of the Ramadan feast at sunset. 
Traditional drums wake people for Sahur -- a pre-dawn meal -- and for the last glass of water until Iftar. 
Talk in Turkey, a country whose population is 99% Muslim, shifts from politics to daily life, religion and nostalgia about Ramadans of years past. 
"When I was a child, my father and I took to the streets to play the drum in order to wake people up. Towards the ends of the month, we visited people to get a tip for our work. Back then people were more generous and we were respected," Ibrahim Molla, who followed in the footsteps of his late father, told SETimes. 
But in recent years, Molla says people don't fast and don't even bother opening their doors. 
While drumming and other traditions are on the verge of dying out, municipalities and organisations are trying to revive memories of former Ramadan celebrations. Television and radio stations are preparing discussions and entertainment shows. 
As part of this effort, municipalities in large cities like Ankara are organising activities in parks and providing free transportation. 
"The spirit of Ramadan is not only about enjoying, it is about mutual understanding and feeling what needy people are suffering during the whole year by fasting for one month. It is a time for sharing and helping those who are less fortunate. I am sorry to see that this spirit is fading away," Mustafa Kurt, 62, a retired civil servant told SETimes. 
The greater Ankara municipality has announced that it is providing free food to about 18,000 people in the city's 30 Iftar tents. In addition, it will also distribute food packages to the poor who live around the capital. Every city, county and village has similar charitable organisations. 
 "This is another tradition and it is nice to see that it has not disappeared, but I really wonder why municipalities are not carrying out such activities for the less fortunate throughout the year," Kurt said. He believes the municipalities have enough of a budget and capacity to provide food for the poor, and charities should operate all year, and should also include non-Muslims. 
 Recalling memories of his childhood in Ankara, Kurt added that neighbours of other faiths were very respectful of this Muslim holiday in the old days. 
 "My closest friend named Ertan was one of the many Jews who used to live in Ankara. ... I remember his mother Rosa forbidding him to eat any food or drink water on the street or near Muslim friends during Ramadan. You would not see any of the Jewish families eat or drink during Ramadan, out of respect. They visited their Muslim friends during the Aid ul-Fitr holiday, which marks the ends of the month-long fast, and their beliefs were respected in the same way," added Kurt. 
