24/08/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 24/08/10
Romania supports Moldova regaining its territorial integrity, President Traian Basescu said on Thursday (August 19th) after meeting with Moldovan Prime Minister Vlad Filat. "Our interest is connected to the things we believe in, that no state's territory can be occupied," Basescu said after the talks. 
 Basescu's comments come a few weeks after authorities in Tiraspol asked the UN to recognise Transdniestr following the International Court of Justice's July 22nd opinion on Kosovo's declaration of independence. 
 Transdniestr is a breakaway territory between the Dniester River and the eastern Moldovan border with Ukraine. It is generally recognised internationally as being de jure in Eastern Moldova as the autonomous Stinga Nistrului (Left Dnestr bank) region. Since its declaration of independence in 1990 it has been governed de facto by the unrecognised Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic (PMR). 
Moldova does not recognise the secession and considers territories controlled by the PMR to be a part of Moldova's sovereign territory. 
 Transdniestr's sovereignty is not recognised by any member of the UN. 
"The Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic has once again come to the conclusion -- and is drawing the attention of the UN towards the fact -- that the republic corresponds to all the international criteria as independent state and meets all the necessary conditions to be recognised internationally," says a letter to the UN from the separatist ministry of foreign affairs. 
"Transdniestr's ministry of foreign affairs urges the UN, as well as other international structures, to actively participate in drawing up unique criteria for recognising the states that have over the years proven their viability." 
Vladimir Iastrebcheak, the head of the Transdniestr diplomacy, said that [Transdniestr's capital] Tiraspol cannot accept the principle of Moldova's territorial integrity in the conflict settlement negotiations. 
The Moldovan government rejected the recognition call by the separatist authorities for the second time in the past two years. 
"This is no news for us, they are just using Kosovo as a pretext," Deputy Prime Minister Victor Osipov said. "Tiraspol's call to the UN is absolutely unreasonable -- the UN doesn't recognise independence." 
Analysts say the two situations cannot be compared. 
 "This is not an ethnic-based conflict, as it was in Kosovo's case. It is a political and geopolitical dispute," Moldovan political analyst Vitalie Ciobanu told SETimes. 
"Transdniestr is a relic of the Cold War, artificially maintained to satisfy Moscow's imperial ambitions in the post-soviet epoch, turning over time into a black hole on Europe's map, where money is laundered through smuggling, arms and drug trafficking," he said. 
With the change of power in Moldova, Ciobanu sees signs of progress in settling the two-decade long conflict. 
 "The pro-European orientation of the new Moldovan administration positively influences the conflict settlement process. Europeanizing, democratising Moldova means creating a strong pole of attraction for the people of the secessionist region," Ciobanu explained. 
"Moldova can legitimately invoke -- to support its national interests -- the Cypriot model. That is to ask Brussels a European integration horizon with or without Transdniestr, in exchange for energetically implementing the ample set of reforms necessary to attain this goal," he said. 
