01/11/2007
(Office of the High Representative, Reuters, AP, DPA, Fena - 31/10/07)
Voicing its full support for High Representative Miroslav Lajcak, a key body of international officials urged politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Wednesday (October 31st) to respect and implement Lajcak's recent decisions on institutional reform. 
The set of actions he proposed on October 19th "are fully in line with his mandate and the constitution of BiH", the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board said in a declaration at the end of its two-day meeting in Sarajevo. "The only objective of these measures is to streamline the decision-making process in the council of ministers and the parliament, and they are necessary for speeding up the reform process." 
The actions Lajcak wants implemented by December 1st include changes to the quorum rules that would make it more difficult for members of government and parliament from any ethnic community to block the adoption of decisions or laws by staging walkouts. 
The High Representative's move infuriated Bosnian Serb politicians. Lawmakers in the Republika Srpska (RS) parliament adopted a declaration Tuesday, rejecting the proposed measures as anti-constitutional and in violation of the Dayton Peace Agreement. 
Criticising politicians for trying to stir a political crisis and for challenging both Lajcak and the PIC's authority and legitimacy, the Steering Board urged "RS leaders to abide by their obligations" instead. 
Noting that the situation in BiH had further deteriorated since their previous meeting in June, the international officials also warned political leaders from both entities that the use of aggressive rhetoric and attempts to undermine progress will not be tolerated. 
"The PIC Steering Board reiterates it will not remain passive in the face of provocative statements or acts," political directors from the board member countries and organisations said in their declaration. 
The Steering Board members are Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Russia, the United States, the EU presidency, the European Commission and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference. 
"Any BiH political leaders or institutions that challenge the High Representative and the PIC Steering Board will be subject to appropriate measures," the statement said. 
It also warned that "the international community retains the necessary instruments to counter destructive tendencies and that it will not allow attempts to undermine the Dayton Peace Agreement, whether from inside or outside the country." 
Last week, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica described the measures proposed by Lajcak as an "open threat to the essential interests of the Serb people" and were aimed at abolishing Republika Srpska. In his statement on October 25th, Kostunica also implied that Lajcak's policies were part of an anti-Serb plan to grant Kosovo independence. 
While joining other members of the Steering Board in their support for Lajcak, Russia criticised the timing of his move to change the voting procedures for the adoption of decisions and legislation. 
"Taking into account the lack of agreement on these measures among the BiH leaders, the Russian Federation considers that the elaboration of the measures in a more stable environment would have been more productive," Russia said in a special note at the end of the declaration. 
