29/10/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 29/10/07
UN chief war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte visited Belgrade on Thursday (October 25th) and Friday, meeting with top Serbian officials. The trip came ahead of a report she will submit to the European Commission (EC) concerning Serbia's co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
What she says in the report could have a major impact on Serbia's chances of moving ahead in the EU accession process. Co-operation with the tribunal is a condition for signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA), considered a first step towards eventual membership. 
The EC already has delayed signing an SAA with Serbia because of lax co-operation. It now awaits word from del Ponte as to whether the situation has improved. 
 In Belgrade, the chief prosecutor said she does not wish to be an obstacle to EU integration, but can only recommend signing the SAA if co-operation is complete. On several occasions, del Ponte has made it clear this means handing over former General Ratko Mladic, one of the top two remaining fugitive indictees. 
 "I hope to see positive results very soon," del Ponte said. "I know there are members of the Serbian government and top officials who are working very hard on that co-operation, and there are also those who could do more." 
Serbian officials insisted the political will exists to resolve the remaining issues, but complained they face unfair pressure. Rasim Ljajic, head of the national council for co-operation with the tribunal, said that out of the 46 indictees believed to be in Serbia, 42 have been delivered so far. 
Eleven indictees were arrested in Serbia, 27 turned themselves in and four were arrested in other countries, he said. 
"We are making quite an effort to implement the action plan [for co-operation with The Hague tribunal], but if someone on the outside is constantly giving us an F mark, that will discourage all who honestly believe this job must be done," Ljajic said. 
 Prior to del Ponte's arrival, Serbian authorities offered a reward of 1m euros to anyone offering information that leads to Mladic's arrest. Security forces also searched several military facilities, looking for indictees. 
Apart from Mladic, The Hague tribunal's most wanted list includes Radovan Karadzic, Stojan Zupljanin and Goran Hadzic. 
While in Belgrade, del Ponte also criticised the Kosovo authorities and UNMIK for their incomplete co-operation with the tribunal. The most serious problems, she said, involved former Kosovo Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj. 
In particular, the chief prosecutor cited murders of witnesses, death threats, and the "scandalous offer" to temporarily release Haradinaj from pre-trial detention and allow him to engage in political activities. 
