26/05/2009
(AFP, Reuters, Javno.hr - 25/05/09; AFP - 21/05/09; Euobserver - 19/05/09; DPA - 14/05/09; AFP - 13/05/09; DPA - 08/05/09)
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said on Monday (May 25th) that Zagreb would not accept any Slovenian changes to an EU proposal for solving the long-standing border dispute between the two countries through international arbitration. 
"We shall not agree to any amendments," he said. 
The plan, tabled by EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn last month, was not an invitation for either Zagreb or Ljubljana to suggest possible changes to it, but a "take it or leave it" offer, which Croatia chose to accept, Sanader said. 
It envisions the establishment of an ad hoc five-member international arbitration tribunal, operating in line with international law, to solve the 18-year-long dispute between the two former Yugoslav republics. 
But politicians in Slovenia criticised the plan, claiming their country was not explicitly recognised as a maritime nation in it and therefore "lost its right to declare a sea belt", Croatian media reported earlier this month. 
Critics also reportedly opposed a provision, under which Slovenia would have to lift its veto of Croatia's EU accession talks, once both countries consented to arbitration. 
The only former Yugoslav republic to have joined the Union so far, Slovenia has been blocking the opening and closure of new chapters in Zagreb's negotiations with Brussels since December. This has raised serious doubts about Croatia's chances of wrapping up its entry talks by the end of this year, so that it can enter the EU as its 28th member in 2011. 
After consulting with leaders of the parties in parliament, Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor sent Ljubljana's demands for changes in the plan to Brussels; these counter proposals have not been made public. 
 "If our amendments, which are crucial for Slovenia's vital interests, are not incorporated, Slovenia will not accept the European Commission's (EC) proposal," the AFP quoted him as saying on May 13th. 
Ljubljana's next steps, Pahor added, would depend on Rehn's response, but there was no way it could be forced to stop blocking Zagreb's talks with Brussels, should the agreement fail. 
Confirming he had received Slovenia's position, Rehn said on May 19th that he would analyse it in detail and would hold further talks with the Croatian and Slovenian foreign ministers within the next few weeks. 
"We need the two countries to agree," Rehn said. "The commission is only a facilitator." 
Echoing Sanader's words that any changes to Rehn's proposal are unacceptable, Croatian Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic said on Monday that his country has shown good will in the six or seven rounds of talks on resolving the dispute over the past few months. 
Viewing Sanader's remarks as counterproductive, Pahor blamed Croatia for provoking Slovenia to block the talks by submitting "contentious documents" that Ljubljana fears could prejudge a solution to their dispute. 
