22/08/2008
(SNA, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Europe.bg - 22/08/08; AFP, AP, SNA, Dnevnik, Mediapool, OLAF, Bulgarian Government - 21/08/08)
Bulgaria must boost the efficacy of its fight against fraud and corruption by the end of this year, the head of the EU Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) said at the start of a two-day visit to Sofia on Thursday (August 21st). 
"Certain changes have been made. What we are expecting now are results," Franz-Hermann Bruner said before his arrival at the invitation of Bulgarian Deputy Prime Minister Meglena Plugchieva, who is in charge of EU fund management. 
The purpose of his trip was to discuss measures to protect the EU's financial interests in Bulgaria. 
Last month, the European Commission (EC) froze nearly 500m euros in aid, citing corruption and the suspected misuse of funds under three pre-accession programmes. This followed a previous suspension of more than 300m euros over similar concerns. Bulgaria has received warnings that it could face more sanctions if it fails to take action. 
"We need to see a clear and tangible outcome of the fight against fraud and corruption in Bulgaria, in judicial procedures as well as concerning the recovery of funds," Bruner said. 
In talks Thursday with Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev, the OLAF chief voiced hope that there will be "a more dynamic improvement" in work by Bulgaria's judiciary within the next few months. 
Bruner also met with the ministers of interior and justice, Mihail Mikov and Meglena Tacheva. 
The EU "wants to see that investigations are moving, cases enter courts and end up with sentences", Tacheva told reporters. 
One of the issues she discussed with Bruner concerned Bulgaria's plan to compile a list of companies suspected of involvement in the misuse of European aid funds. She said he promised OLAF's expert assistance in defining the criteria for including firms on that list. 
 Speaking after his meeting with Bruner on Friday, Chief Prosecutor Boris Velchev voiced confidence that Bulgaria would prove it could address problems identified in the EC's damning monitoring report of July 23rd. He hoped the next one, due in March 2009, would be more positive. 
Velchev also promised that his office would further improve its communication with the EU Anti-fraud Office. 
Bruner also holds talks Friday with Petko Sertov, head of the State Agency for National Security, and Finance Minister Plamen Oresharski. 
