12/07/2005
(Various sources -- 11/07/05 - 12/07/05)
Many senior Western officials attended a ceremony in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) on Monday (11 July) marking the 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre of 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys. 
Addressing tens of thousand of mourners, they acknowledged the international community's share of responsibility for the atrocity, while pledging persistent efforts to bring to justice those who orchestrated it -- wartime Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic. 
 "Our first duty is to uncover, and confront, the full truth about what happened…[and] for us who serve the UN, that truth is a hard one to face," UN Secretary General Kofi Annan said in a message delivered by his Chief of Staff, Mark Malloch Brown. "We can say -- and it is true -- that great nations failed to respond adequately," Annan said. 
In July 1995, a contingent of 370 lightly armed UN soldiers, with orders to shoot only in self-defence, was in charge of protecting Srebrenica, which the UN had declared a "safe area". They were helpless to stop the onslaught of Bosnian Serb forces under Mladic's command, which overtook the enclave on 11 July. In the course of the following week, Mladic's forces killed virtually every man and boy they were able to capture. 
 "The victims had put their trust in international protection," EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said in a statement. "But we, the international community, let them down. This was a colossal, collective and shameful failure." 
During the ceremony at the Potocari memorial centre outside Srebrenica, British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, also expressed his personal remorse over the massacre, describing it as "one of the darkest chapters" in European history since 1945. 
"It is a shame for the international community that we have allowed this to happen right in front of our eyes," Straw said. "I particularly regret this. And I am deeply sorry for it." 
Other international officials attending Monday's sombre ceremony included UN war crimes tribunal president Theodor Meron, US Ambassador-at-large for War Crimes Issues Pierre Richard Prosper and Richard Holbrooke, the former US diplomat who negotiated the Dayton Peace Agreement that ended the war in BiH. 
Calling for the arrest and handover of the architects of the massacre, Meron said the crimes committed in 1995 were not simply murders. "They were targeted at a particular human group with the intent to destroy it. They were so heinous that they warrant the gravest of labels: genocide," he said. 
The tribunal will not have accomplished its task of bringing justice to and fostering reconciliation in the region so long as Karadzic and Mladic remain at large, Meron added. 
 Sulejman Tihic, the Muslim member of BiH's tripartite presidency, also called for the arrest and punishment of ICTY indictees charged with genocide over the Srebrenica massacre. 
"The only thing we can do now is to do our best in finding the missing and killed ones -- to bury them with dignity -- and to punish those who are responsible for the crime. Particularly, the most wanted war criminals Karadzic and Mladic," Tihic said.
