03/06/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb - 03/06/04
At the beginning of May, the Croatian Parliament passed the new media law, filling the legal void created at the beginning of the year when the Constitutional Court abrogated an earlier law.
The new law, like its predecessor, contains several controversial clauses. Its provision on media ownership is subject to dispute, analysts say.
Until now, the law mandated that a single publisher could not control 40 per cent of the market, and could not take over or buy shares of similar media companies. By contrast, the new law permits control of 40 per cent of the market, while stipulating that control cannot be realised in a way that results in a publisher holding 30 per cent of the market while controlling a sister company which itself holds 10 per cent of the market.
Many attribute the change to the fact that the Europa Press holding company made an offer to purchase the Slobodna Dalmacija publishing house. Critics say changing the rules of the game in the midst of a privatisation process is unfair.
Also controversial is a provision requiring that journalists, under certain conditions, reveal their sources of information. Until now, the right of journalists to protect their sources had been guaranteed. The law does not clearly say which state body will be entrusted with the task of determining when journalists must identify their sources.
Of particular interest is the portion of the clause that relates to "prevention of revealing confidential information with the objective of protecting the authority and objectivity of judicial power". Media experts say that this language restricts the ability of journalists to report on cases of judicial corruption, since such reporting -- even if accurate -- could be interpreted as harming judicial authority.
Responding to the new legislation, the Croatian Association of Journalists (HND) charged that the government is trying to shut down standard sources of information, in addition to limiting official sources such as Croatia Radio-Television, the subject of another recently adopted law. Restricting information in such a way, the HND says, is contrary to democratic standards.
