27/06/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 27/06/11
President Traian Basescu warned on Tuesday (June 21st) that he will move ahead with a controversial provision of a draft constitution that removes the presumption of legally obtained assets and paves the way for the confiscation of wealth that cannot be justified. 
"The fortune is protected, but we don't have the right to protect theft, too. The current constitution guarantees those who hold illegal assets, nothing can happen to them," Basescu explained. 
His statement came soon after his much touted draft constitution was dealt a serious blow on June 17th, when the judges of the Romanian Constitutional Court decided some of its articles encroach on fundamental rights. Two articles have specifically been targeted by the magistrates -- one removing the character of legally obtained wealth and the other on lifting the MPs and ministers' immunity. 
The court argued that removing the legal character of assets encroaches on property rights and places the owner in continuous insecurity because it is the owner who has to prove the legality of his assets. 
The Romanian Magistrates' Association had previously warned that lifting the presumption that wealth has been obtained legally is contrary to the legal principle of presumed innocence. 
The Constitutional Court's verdict is merely consultative and the presidency sent the draft constitution to parliament for debate and adoption. 
 "We have lost a battle, but not the whole war against the illegal assets," Prime Minister Emil Boc said in reaction to the court's verdict. "But in the parliament, taking into account the court's decision, some of the text can be thus arranged so that they can suit the objective of confiscating the illegally obtained assets so that acts of corruption can no longer be a source for gaining large wealth," he added during a debate on the draft constitution. 
The court's decision risks having negative effects, officials involved in the anti-corruption fight say. "The decision offers an excuse to those who want to protect the unjustified fortunes and want the rule of law to fail in Romania," Horia Georgescu, secretary-general of the National Agency for Integrity (ANI), empowered to verify the assets of state dignitaries, told SETimes. "Basically the Constitutional Court's decision is an invitation to criminals to come and do business in Romania," he added. 
Analysts see a winding road ahead for the project. "Even if the Constitutional Court's role is merely consultative in this case, it gives the draft constitution a moral blow from the very start and also creates a semi-legal basis for its opponents who will use the court's decision to support their position," Razvan Mihalascu, a political correspondent for B1 TV, told SETimes. 
 "Basically, the whole project revolved around the two provisions -- illegal assets and immunity for dignitaries -- and it is unlikely the MPs will accommodate the presidency's demands, judging by the fact the two provisions affect some of them directly," he added. 
But Georgescu is optimistic. "There's always a chance. The amendment that concerns the way the assets are obtained enjoys wide public support. Also, representatives of the international community in Bucharest and the European Commission have shown their firm support for this constitutional change," he underlined. The US Embassy in Bucharest criticised the Constitutional Court's decision, saying it stands in the way of the anti-corruption fight. 
 "Like a year ago, when ANI was suppressed, these instruments work as an effective external factor of pressure without which progress in the fulfilling of justice wouldn't be possible. Politicians have to show responsibility in their decisions and not place Romania at the periphery of the rule of law by trying to protect the individual," Georgescu concluded. 
