15/06/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Ohrid -- 15/06/13
Balkan countries perceive the European Union as a guarantor of collective security and Union membership will facilitate that role, according to experts who participated at the latest international security conference in Ohrid. 
The conference included 140 university professors and experts who assessed regional security threats and opportunities, particularly in the context of EU accession. 
Most importantly, all Balkan states have EU prospects and are working to fulfill membership criteria, the participants said. 
The possibilities for ethnic and religious conflicts like in the 1990s still exist, and the best solution to prevent them is EU membership, according to Mladen Bajagic, a professor at the Criminal Police Academy in Belgrade. 
"EU membership can cushion not only internal problems but also crisis situations, which can cause global problems and threats," Bajagic told SETimes. 
The EU and NATO collective security systems are also a guarantee against the increasingly present threat of Islamic extremists, Zlate Dimovski, professor on terrorism at Skopje's Faculty of Security, said. 
"Radical Islam is expanding and we can not quite assess about where it poses the greatest danger," Dimovski told SETimes. 
Dimovski said that if other states face the threat of Islamic extremists and are acting on countering it, the Balkans should follow suit and employ the same approaches, but best of all, be part of the same security umbrella. "For we have it here too," Dimovski said. 
Professor Nikola Dujovski of Skopje's Faculty of Security said the EU's security mechanisms provide a certain guarantee against internal conflicts but also against outside threats, which is why completing EU integration as soon as possible is important. 
"Whether we will be accepted soon or in a few years, we must implement and use the mechanisms the EU uses," Dujovski told SETimes. 
The EU collective security model should be implemented in the Balkans as well, according to Davor Solomon, a professor at Zagreb's Higher Police School. 
"EU [membership] should be a goal of all regional countries, but it should not be used as an instrument for solving our issues," Solomon told SETimes. 
Some experts were concerned by the practice of some countries like Slovenia, Greece or Bulgaria to impose EU member candidate conditions to address bilateral disputes, which ultimately may undermine security. 
"We all need to behave in a European [way]," Solomon said. 
The need for the EU security concept is urgent and conditions must be created for Macedonia, Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina to enter the EU, according to Zeljko Nikac, professor at Belgrade's Police Academy. 
"One of those conditions is the security component, i.e., well-organised security services which will co-operate because security is a joint problem. A good concept of security is one that will increase co-operation between all countries in the region to eliminate all security risks, stemming from terrorism to organised and other crime," Nikac told SETimes. 
Do you think the EU model will improve security in the region? Let us know in the comments. 
