08/06/2013
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 08/06/13
Kosovo public broadcaster RTK launched its second channel, which will provide a neutral voice dedicated to the experiences of the Serb community and the country's other minority groups. 
RTK 2 signed on the air May 3rd with a diverse staff of about 50 under the direction of Zarko Joksimovic, a Serb TV journalist. 
"I am proud to have all of us, Albanians, Serbs, Gorani, Bosnians, working here together in this channel," Joksimovic said. 
The channel will include programming on the cultural and spiritual identity of the Serb community and other non-Albanian communities in Kosovo, and plans to dedicate most of its resources and air time to programmes from the field, as opposed to shows produced in the studio. 
Joksimovic said the channel will be "like a window to the neighbourhood." 
"Everything in the Balkans is political, but we will try to deal with other things as well. And even when dealing with politics, we will try to do it that way that does not incite discontent between the communities, but be a bridge between them," Joksimovic said. 
RTK 1 primarily broadcasts shows in Albanian, but also produces programming in Serbian, Turkish, Bosnian and Roma. 
Kosovo has three national TV frequencies and RTK 2 will broadcast through the cable operators until its signal is digitalised. Joksimovic said they have agreements with Kosovo companies Kujtesa and Ipko, and the local Serbian cable providers will broadcast the signal in the Serb-majority areas, including northern Kosovo. 
Zeljko Tvrdisic, a Serb resident in Mitrovica, said he hopes the new channel will provide objective reporting. 
"I am skeptical when it comes to the independence of this channel and its editorial policy. It's the editorial policy that makes me more skeptical. This channel will not be watched in the north and it will not be part of the local Serb cable systems," Tvrdisic told SETimes. 
Danijela Mitic, a Serb in Caglavica, just outside Pristina, told SETimes that the Serbian community in Kosovo welcomes every activity related to better information on the processes in the country. 
"If this channel will provide unbiased and updated information from all over Kosovo then this TV will be watched," Mitic said. "We expect attractive content and not a big focus on politics, as we already have it too much." 
Mentor Shala, RTK general director, said the channel will strive to remain apolitical. He added that RTK 2 is especially significant in the public broadcaster's effort to bridge the gap between Serbs and Albanians because Serbs are the channel's main audience. 
"The programming … will summarise or will be completely at the service of the Serb community. At the beginning, [it will be] mainly to [the service of] the Serb community. … We will try to the maximum to be an apolitical programme," Shala said. 
Dukagjin Gorani, a former adviser to Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, was part of the channel's creation. 
"The attempt was to reconfirm the will of the prime minister's office to offer a possibility to the non-Albanian communities to express the positions, principles and their way of living in the social and political context. It has been a big success in the attempts to offer as much as possible for the free expression of all the citizens of Kosovo, despite of their ethnic background," Gorani told SETimes. 
He added that RTK 2's success will depend on the work of its staff to use it as a tool of communication. 
"It depends on them now … It should be an independent channel, public, responsible, but also free to make its own editorial policies. They will be part of the many attempts to build a free and democratic state, with ethnic diversity, in which everybody will feel part of it," Gorani said. 
Will you watch RTK2? Tell us why or why not by leaving a comment. 
