27/12/2010
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina - 27/12/10
They are in the intersections of roads, in Mother Teresa Square and on the campus of the University of Pristina. They are everywhere, cleaning the windshields of cars that stop, asking people for spare change. 
 It's no surprise in Pristina to see children in the streets seeking handouts to provide a living for themselves. Mostly, the children are local Roma and Albanian children who subsist in poverty, but the number of Roma from Albania is on the rise. 
Most of these children range in age from about 4 to 16, boys and girls alike. Sometimes they are accompanied by their parents, who anxiously wait nearby. Even before the 1990s conflict, this was not an unusual activity in Pristina, though the numbers seem higher now. 
The children do not go to school; they live on the streets. They can be used by criminal groups, and in the past, some children were used to distribute drugs. Many still suspect that the money they manage to panhandle often ends up in the hands of organised crime groups. 
EB, 35, is from Lushnje, Albania. "I'm a mother of six. Like the others, I turn up every day with my children here [on campus] and ask the people to give me some money. Sometimes the children go in the streets to [beg] separately from me, but it's not enough for food. We live in tents. Sometimes we go and sleep here in the church," she said, referring to the Serbian Orthodox Church on Pristina University's campus. 
She says she has not sent her children to school and will not, because she doesn't have the money to do it. What is important now, she says, is survival, to avoid "dying from hunger". 
 For many people who encounter these homeless children, this situation is unacceptable. "This is a violation of law, and the government must protect them," Liridona Ibrahimi, a student at the University of Pristina, tells SETimes. 
 "Current legislation in Kosovo protects those people, even those that come from Albania," Asad Gashi, an analyst in Pristina, says. 
"For the Roma coming from Albania, the government has international and national obligations to offer asylum to them, if they are not protected in Albania. And for the time they live in Kosovo, they must be legalised and get assistance, according to the asylum law in Kosovo," he adds. 
 The situation confronting the Roma in Albania is bleaker than that of any other group; they are in a misery league of their own. Their villages have decrepit or make-shift infrastructure and houses are often considered uninhabitable. In some areas flats are built for the Roma, but there is no policy in place to improve their quality of life. Gashi says the government needs a "functional national strategy" to address the issues confronting the community. 
According to the Municipality of Pristina Civil Registration Office and the Social Affairs Bureau, there is no official estimate of the Roma population. Part of the problem is that more than 90% of the street children are not registered with authorities. Born at home or in the streets, they are not issued birth certificates. Accordingly, they don't qualify for state social assistance -- financial or health -- because they lack the proper identification cards. 
Nor do they enrol in schools, living as they do on the street and begging. The lack of an education means they grow up with no real employment prospects and the cycle repeats itself for another generation of Roma. 
Artan is from Pristina, and is known by virtually everyone in Mother Teresa Square. He goes into nearby restaurants every day and asks people for money. He says he has three brothers and four sisters. 
 "Some," he explains, "work in the streets and do anything that we can. Sometimes mom comes with me, but not always, as we must all go to get money. I've never been in school and can't write and can't read, I have no house and we sleep in the bus station." He is nine. 
Activists say the only way to resolve their problem is to offer them social protection, including decent housing and education. The ministry of education has approved the Strategy for Integration of Roma, Ashkali and Egyptians (RAE), but for now, it remains just a document. 
The ministry of communities, with the UNDP mission in Kosovo, has launched a scholarship programme to support RAE children to attend the schools, but the number of scholarships available is limited, given the needs of the community as a whole. 
The Kosovo police repeatedly expel the Albanian Roma, but they always come back. Gashi says he considers it purely a matter of human trafficking, given the rate of returns. 
Trafficking, he says, should be viewed as a tentacle of organised crime, a force Kosovo battles, as do other countries in the region and far beyond. 
The Court of Pristina approves these deportations because by law, street beggars are committing a criminal offence. They are transferred to Albanian authorities and then sent mainly to Kukes in northeastern Albania. There they live in a grim former industrial area of abandoned buildings, or in tents. Kukes is a springboard for Roma to move to Kosovo. 
Gashi says the governments of Kosovo and Albania should resolve this issue by offering social guarantees for those returning to Albania. He says at this point, both governments have failed. 
