06/02/2006
(Balkan Investigative Reporting Network - 06/02/06)
Over the past decade foreign governments have provided more than 250m euros in support of media development projects in the Balkans, a Western expert says in a comment published by the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network (BIRN) on Sunday (5 February). 
"As is the case with all development work, there have been good and bad points," said Amsterdam-based media development consultant Yasha Lange. But, on balance, it was worth it, he added. 
Some of the shortcomings were linked to the choice of projects, or media outlets and associations. Donors, said Lange, "sometimes choose proposals that seem to offer easy answers to very complex problems". Funding the establishment of different competing institutions appeared not to have been the best option, as not all have been able to survive in a difficult environment. 
"Most notably, money has been thrown into the task of turning state media outlets into public broadcasters without ever securing sufficient political will to ensure that this transition will be successful," Lange noted. 
Per Byman, head of the humanitarian assistance division of the Swedish International Development Co-operation Agency, agreed that the donor funding was not always well-targeted. 
"The media success stories in the Balkans are all based on strong local media organisations that were able to attract foreign funding through inventive strategies and a lot of risk-taking, both financially and politically," the Swedish expert -- who previously oversaw the agency's role in supporting the media in the Balkans -- wrote in a separate, parallel comment. "The failed projects are those that were started or promoted from outside, with little or no local support." 
As concerned the support provided for journalistic training, Lange believed that donors tended to "spend too much on training without creating lasting institutions" and to finance the delivery of courses that did not always correspond to the interests of the media industry itself. 
Although the quantity of journalistic training might not have helped resolve all structural problems the Balkan media faced, it has contributed to a greater awareness of professional standards, improved technical skills and resulted in better management of some individual outlets, according to Lange. 
"I have no doubt that foreign support has helped to sustain media outlets with the courage to raise awareness of issues which, while not always welcome amongst audiences, have had a direct impact on history," Lange wrote. 
Byman, meanwhile, believes future foreign assistance for the media sector in the Balkans should focus on three things. One is providing support for watchdogs "tasked with monitoring public broadcasters, media legislation, press freedom, concentration of ownership and other related areas". Donors should also finance postgraduate courses for journalists within local university faculties or vocational centres and focus on "a limited number of important, responsible media outlets". 
"Our job as donors is now to ensure that a certain stability prevails," Byman said. "We might provide credits, if there are none to be had. We can support watchdogs to keep an eye on the media scene with regard to oppression. We can continue to improve legislation and to adapt it to European standards. But we can no longer walk in, distort the free media market that is slowly emerging and continue to support our darlings." 
