20/01/2005
(Vjesnik - 20/01/05; Reuters, BBC Monitoring, HINA, EurActiv - 19/01/05)
Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitrij Rupel suggested Wednesday (19 January) that a joint Croat-Slovenian committee could be set up soon to discuss bilateral ties. The ongoing disputes between Ljubljana and Zagreb should not cloud the relations between the two countries, nor Croatia's EU accession bid, the minister stressed. 
Slovenia and Croatia have argued over a number of issues since declaring their independence from the former Yugoslavia in 1991. The dispute over Piran Bay, on the Istrian peninsula, has led to a number of border incidents and remains one of the most critical issues in bilateral relations. A small stretch of land at Slovenia's southeastern border with Croatia is also the subject of disagreement. 
The two countries signed an accord on access to international waters in 2001, but it has not been ratified by Croatia yet. 
The Krsko nuclear power plant, located in Slovenia but built and owned jointly by the two countries, as well as the outstanding debts of the now defunct Ljubljanska Banka to Croatian depositors have also fuelled disputes. '
''There are a number of problems with Croatia that Slovenia can only solve in the framework of the EU,'' Rupel said at a news conference in Zagreb on Wednesday. ''Therefore I wish that Croatia would get closer to the EU as soon as possible,'' he added. 
Slovenia joined the EU on 1 May 2004, along with nine other Central and East European countries, becoming the first former Yugoslav republic to be admitted into the bloc. Croatia is due to start its EU accession talks in March and is expected to gain full-fledged membership in 2009. 
The latest incident, in which Croatian border police detained a Slovenian politician in September last year, prompted a threat from Ljubljana that it would block Zagreb's EU bid. The threat was withdrawn soon afterwards. 
Urging both countries to seek a solution through dialogue, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana noted that the door to EU membership remains open for all Balkan states. "On that way, they have to learn to solve conflicts through dialogue and collaboration," Solana said. 
Rupel said Zagreb had agreed to his proposal that a joint expert committee be established to discuss bilateral relations. According to him, an informal meeting between the Slovenian and Croatian prime ministers, Janez Jansa and Ivo Sanader, was also being planned. But he offered no details as to the timing or location. 
Zagreb has indicated that it would seek international arbitration on the border issue in the event a solution is not reached through bilateral dialogue. 
