26/08/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 26/08/11
Zejnullah Gruda, a professor of international public law, has been appointed director of the Kosovo Institute for War Crimes. Recently established by the government, the public research institute will collect and publish data on crimes against peace, war crimes, crimes against humanity and acts of genocide committed in Kosovo from 1998 through June 1999. 
SETimes correspondent Muhamet Brajshori sat down with Gruda to discuss the new institute. 
SETimes: Will you conduct investigations or just collect evidence? 
 Zejnullah Gruda: War crimes are crimes that never become old. [We'll] work to document them, to collect evidence and data, systemize data, and publish it. By presenting the evidence the Institute can help the authorities put people on trial and prepare lawsuits for national and international courts. 
 SETimes: Who will be investigated, just Serbian and Yugoslav army and police, or will the KLA be included? 
 Gruda: When you speak about the crimes that occurred in the former Yugoslavia, what I believe is necessary to make clear in the beginning is who perpetrated the crimes, who carried out aggressive war, and who created a climate that was favourable to crimes. 
I believe that under no circumstance can you equate the crimes carried out by the Yugoslav and Serbian troops or someone from the state structure [with the KLA], because this was a state policy which was created, planned and implemented with state mechanisms in which the media was used as one of the worst mechanisms to create a climate [via propaganda] in favour of war and crimes. 
The Serbs began those wars by committing aggression against Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and then Kosovo, and according to the Nuremberg Statute, those are crimes in the first category of crimes against peace. 
 SETimes: EULEX is expected to launch an investigation on the Dick Marty report. Will the organ trafficking issue be on your agenda? 
 Gruda: The Dick Marty report has caused reasonable and some unreasonable worries. However, the report has caused the effects for which he was asked. Serbs are doing aggressive propaganda, not just now, but previously. During the Bosnian War -- through Italian philosopher Daniel Salvatore Schiffer -- they tried to say that the Serbs were victims in Bosnia. It had some effect, but it ended. 
This is in line with the Serbian and Yugoslav idea. The Yugoslav ambassador to the UN, Vladislav Jovanovic, wrote a letter to the UN Security Council President after Srebrenica, saying that in Srebrenica crimes were not committed by Serbs, but that Bosnians killed each other. He was also foreign minister of Yugoslavia for a while. The only person who opposed him was former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright who told him 'You are kidding us.' 
 SETimes: Will this documentation lead to an indictment of Serbia in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) for war crimes and war damages in Kosovo? 
Gruda: This requires a political decision that can't be made at the moment, because Kosovo is not a UN member, nor a party of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, which is a requirement to indict someone before this court. 
To happen, this will take time, and it won't be soon, not that Kosovo would fail to attract the majority of votes needed in the UN General Assembly, but Russia -- because of its reactionary policy -- blocks any attempt for a recommendation in the Security Council, and this is a problem with the procedure. 
In Part 2 of this interview, Gruda discusses his dissatisfaction with the work of the UN war crimes tribunal. 
