12/08/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 12/08/10 
Parliament's decision to grant politicians the right to hold office in the legislative and executive branches of government simultaneously is drawing fire. 
Under new amendments to the Anti-Corruption Agency Law, it is legal for a member of parliament -- for example -- to serve as mayor at the same time. The amendments will be valid until the next elections in 2012. 
 On Tuesday (August 10th), President Boris Tadic said the country should rein in the practice, which is already widespread. 
"There is no doubt that we have to be heading towards the abolition of dual offices, but on the other hand, we cannot make all decisions at this time, since it is necessary to create real possibilities for adoption of such decisions," Tadic said. 
Experts say the latest changes will weaken control over officials, and could damage the state economically. 
Anti-Corruption Agency committee member Zlatko Minic told SETimes that the legislative amendments would "bring chaos to the area of conflict of interest". 
"The agency will begin legal action in the Constitutional Court, and in addition to that, we hope that international institutions and Europe will warn the government that this is not a good path," said Minic. 
He highlighted the potentially negative impact on business and the economy. "Somebody could be a councillor and the chair of a state-owned company board of directors, elected by the same municipal assembly and owing to that he could give preference to his own company, at the expense of another budget user," he said. 
According to estimates, around 2,000 officials currently hold dual offices in Serbia. Under the July 28th amendments, up to 6,000 officials now have the green light to do so, Minic says. 
Although members of their parties voted in favour of the amendments, Serbian government representatives have not publically commented on them. 
Parliament member Vladan Batic, who formally proposed the amendments, said that they were necessary "to adhere to the principle of legal security" so that state and local elected officials would not lose their acquired rights. 
"The elections are nearing, so any other solution at the moment would result in anarchy, chaos and massive expense," said Batic. 
Critics of the changes quickly gained the support of their European colleagues. Drago Kos, president of the Council of Europe's Group of States against Corruption (GRECO), said that exceptional damage would be done if the amendments to the Anti-Corruption Agency in Serbia allowed the practice of holding multiple offices to continue. 
 "Combining the offices of mayor and MP would be in breach of the constitutional principle of the separation of powers because mayors belong to the executive branch of government and MPs the legislative," Kos told the Belgrade media. 
United Serbia party president Dragan Markovic, a key player in Serbia's ruling coalition, is both a member of parliament and mayor of the city of Jagodina, in central Serbia. 
He has denied pushing for the changes, and in fact voted against them. Following the adoption of the amendments, however, Markovic told journalists that he would not leave either of his offices. He said he was simply respecting the newly-adopted law. 
