18/10/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 18/10/11
Strikes that began last week continue, as the Serbian police trade union demands better working conditions and higher salaries. In addition to higher pay, the police want a new collective bargaining agreement, organisational reform and new uniforms. 
"The interior ministry has shown understanding for our demands, but the finance ministry is blocking the realisation," Police Union of Serbia leader Veljko Mijailovic told SETimes. He said that for two years now, the union has been warning that policemen do not have adequate winter equipment. 
"Another winter is approaching, and not all policemen received winter jackets and boots yet," Mijailovic explained. He apologised to the public, but said there is no way to solve the problems but by way of a strike. 
The Serbian Interior Ministry's data shows that the average salary of police officers is between 350 and 400 euros monthly. This security service has 45,000 employees, while it should have around 59,000, according to set norms and standards. Belgrade alone lacks more than 1,000 police officers. 
The Police Union of Serbia boasts about 15,000 members. They are also demanding that the government amend the law on the police. 
Mijailovic explained that the union is asking the government finally to regulate the systematisation of employees in the police, because without it, there can be no salary raise in 2012. The union is also demanding adequate pay for shift work. 
During the strike, the issuing of ID cards, passports and other documents is conducted only in cases of emergency, and border crossings are functioning with reduced manpower. 
Police Director Milorad Veljovic thinks the union is justified in its requests and demands. 
"The state must realise the importance of the police in maintaining security. The police guard all border and administrative crossings and are always called on when high-risk gatherings need security and protection," Veljovic told SETimes. 
