09/07/2009
By Marina Stojanovska and Christos Ringas for Southeast European Times in Skopje and Athens -- 09/07/09
Although he refused to set a specific timeframe, UN mediator Mathew Nimetz said on Wednesday (July 8th) that he is more optimistic than ever about finding a solution to the ongoing feud between the two countries. A deal, he suggested, could even come within this year. 
 In Athens on Wednesday, Nimetz met with Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis and PASOK leader George Papandreou. A day earlier, he met with Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski in Skopje. 
Nimetz said he discussed a revised version of his October proposal. It suggests changing the constitutional name Republic of Macedonia to "Republic of North Macedonia" for use internationally. Domestically, it would remain Republic of Macedonia. 
 "I suggested specific changes to the October proposal and asked them to examine the total package along with the changes," said Nimitz. 
Both sides have previously rejected the proposal. Gruevski and then-President Branko Crvenkovski said an overhaul was needed. Bakoyannis said it was "not satisfactory as it stands" and that several points were unacceptable, problematic, or unclear. 
"Only after the necessary clarifications and corrections can this document become the basis for reaching a solution," Bakoyannis told the Greek parliament's defence and foreign affairs committee at the end of October. 
Although Nimetz did not disclose any of the changes made to his previous proposal, he described the name dispute process as a complex issue, and said he aims to find a dignified solution for both sides. 
"I believe in the talks for a mutually beneficial solution; I believe that we are very close to finding a solution, and that is why I'm more optimistic than before," Nimetz said. 
In Skopje, the UN mediator also met with Foreign Affairs Minister Antonio Milososki, the ethnic Albanian Democratic Union for Integration's (DUI) Xhevat Ademi and DUI Vice-President Rafiz Aliti. 
"Our attitude is clear. The solution acceptable for our Macedonian fellows will be acceptable for DUI too," Aliti said. 
