11/06/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 11/06/09
Although the relationship between Macedonia and Serbia is sensitive, the defence ministries of the two countries expressed a willingness to cultivate ties and open dialogue during meetings in Skopje on Wednesday (June 10th). 
Serbian Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac met with several Macedonian leaders, including counterpart Zoran Konjanovski, President Gjorge Ivanov and Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski. 
 Konjanovski and Sutanovac signed a key defence co-operation agreement, and said that Euro-Atlantic integration is the priority of both countries. 
"We are discussing development of good, neighbourly relations, mutual information and respect, and an open dialogue and strengthening mutual trust," said Konjanovski. 
 "All countries in the region have the same priorities -- co-operation in the Euro-Atlantic integration processes." 
There's still a lot of work to be done according to Sutanovac, including tightening border control and eliminating security risks. 
 He added that he sees plenty of room for co-operation in Serbia's booming weapons and military industry, and noted that the Military Academy in Belgrade will be open to Macedonian cadets. 
Relations between the two countries have been strained since Macedonia recognised Kosovo last year. In response, Serbia expelled the Macedonian ambassador. However, in a new twist, Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu was not invited to Ivanov's recent inauguration ceremonies. 
An invitation for a separate visit was later extended to Sejdiu, but he declined, once it was downgraded from an official visit with state honours to a working visit. The Macedonian Information Agency quoted Sejdiu's spokesman, Xhavit Beqiri, as saying Pristina and Skopje plan to establish diplomatic relations soon. 
At the meeting Wednesday, Sutanovac said Serbia favours a peaceful solution to the Kosovo issue. 
"I would like to emphasise that Macedonia and Serbia do not agree on the solution of the Kosovo problem. But what we agree is that any solution should be safe for the people in the region, and it is of joint concern that it is solved peacefully just as Serbia is trying to." 
