09/03/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 09/03/11
Waiting until the deadline, the Socialist Party registered on Tuesday (March 8th) to participate in the May 8th elections, on condition it is guaranteed a free and fair process. 
The opposition party's allies – the Union for the Human Rights, the Social Democratic Party and the True Socialist Party 91 -- followed suit, also registering with the Central Election Commission. 
The political climate has been turbulent since the June 2009 general elections. A series of demonstrations and parliamentary boycotts followed the contested vote. A rally of SP supporters against the government on January 21st ended with four demonstrators dead and scores injured, including civilians and policemen. 
Speaking at a summit of European Socialists held in Athens at the weekend, SP leader Edi Rama pointed out the urgent need for a solution to the political stalemate in Albania. 
Rama, however, touted the May 8th elections as a chance "to remove" the government of Prime Minister Sali Berisha, who has been a fixture in the political arena for more than two decades. 
 "A vote in the local elections this time holds only one message: never again. We will enter the coming local elections not for those who will be put at the head of a commune or municipality, but to remove Berisha from the head of Albania, so that Albania can finally raise its head," Rama told supporters in Pogradec on Tuesday. 
There has been continuous pressure to get Albanian opposition parties to participate in the May vote. 
 "For Albania to move forward, it is important to exercise your right to vote. It's also important for those … who represent different political points of view to give the Albanian voters a choice so that they can make a choice. These elections are about Albania's future," US Ambassador to Tirana Alexander Arvizu said last month. 
He announced that the US Embassy in Tirana will be allocating nearly $360,000 in election related assistance. 
Berisha told his party's MPs on Monday that the campaign will be focused on voters and their needs. 
 "I am convinced that Albanian citizens will give in this election their substantial contribution for the consolidation of democracy. I invite Mr Rama to read the messages of the Albanian citizens, but also [the messages] of the friends of Albania in Europe and the world -- local elections are proof of the position towards freedom of the Albanian political forces and Albanian citizens," Berisha said. 
President Bamir Topi appealed to parties to be responsible. 
"Political parties should hold their responsibilities not only for the preparation of the electoral infrastructure, but also for the organisation of the electoral campaign and the development of the elections according to the most democratic standards," Topi said on Monday. 
