24/09/2004
(The New York Times, Independent, Guardian, International Herald Tribune, EurActiv - 24/09/04; Reuters, AP, AFP, BBC, CNN, FT, Turkish Press, EUobserver, VOA, Dow Jones, RFE/RL - 23/09/04)
Turkey's EU bid regained momentum Thursday (23 September) after Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan assured the bloc that his country would pass penal code reforms but would not include a controversial clause outlawing adultery. The Turkish Parliament will convene an extraordinary session on Sunday to debate the legislation. 
On 6 October, the European Commission (EC) is due to publish a report on Turkey's progress towards EU accession. The recommendations made in that report will serve as the basis for a decision by EU leaders, during their summit in December, on whether to give Ankara a starting date for membership talks. 
While pushing for the passage of the penal code reforms -- which include laws against rape, pedophilia and torture, as well as measures to improve human rights standards -- the EU voiced strong opposition to a provision that would criminalise adultery, warning it could jeopardise the country's EU bid. Last week, Erdogan's Justice and Development Party withdrew the entire package for reconsideration. 
During his one-day visit to Brussels on Thursday, Erdogan pledged that the legislation would be adopted and would not include the adultery clause. He also said he would not push for adoption of the measure during his term in office. 
"No item which is not already included will be included, and I mean by that the issue of adultery -- we need to adopt all these draft laws together," said Erdogan. 
Following talks with the Turkish prime minister, EU Enlargement Commissioner Guenter Verheugen indicated the EC's report would recommend setting a date for launching accession talks. 
"We have been able to find solutions for all remaining outstanding problems," Verheugen said during a joint press conference with Erdogan. "My conclusion is that there are no more obstacles on the table now … from my point of view there are no further conditions which Turkey must fulfil in order to allow the commission to make a recommendation." 
"The assurances I received today ... will allow me to make a very clear recommendation," the commissioner added. 
Speaking before the European Parliament later Thursday, Erdogan said he was aware that once the accession talks start, it would take years for actual entry into the Union. 
"Implementation will require a change in mentality and this will not be easy," Erdogan said. 
In Ankara, Turkey's main opposition party, the Republican People's Party (CHP), welcomed the government's promise to proceed with the penal code legislation. 
"We are happy with the result, this is what we wanted," the AFP quoted the CHP parliamentary group's deputy chairman, Kemal Anadol, as saying.
