19/01/2011
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 19/01/2011 
Macedonia's Commission for Protection against Discrimination began its work last Monday (January 17th) when it appointed Ministry of Labor and Social Policy expert Dusko Minovski as its president. 
The commission will act according to the Law for Prevention and Protection against Discrimination, which was passed in April 2010 and entered in force on January 1st. "The commission and the law against discrimination are completely harmonised with EU legislation, with which Macedonia fulfilled another key requirement for EU accession," Minovski told SETimes 
Any citizen who believes he or she has suffered illegal discrimination has a right to file a complaint with the commission within three months of the violation or within one year since learning the act is discriminatory. Macedonian law prohibits discrimination on the basis of ethnicity, gender, race, social status, language, citizenship, religious conviction, political affiliation or disability. 
The commission will receive and review complaints, prepare cases when there is a basis, offer opinions and recommendations, and inform the petitioners of their rights and responsibilities under the law. 
Within three months of receiving a complaint, it will provide an opinion and will recommend a way to remedy the violation. An individual who is alleged to have committed discrimination is required to act according to the recommendation and provide a remedy within 30 days. If he or she does not do so, the Commission can file a suit in court. 
Organisations will be fined from 800 to 1,000 euros if they violate the dignity of individuals or discriminate against them. In addition any individual involved in a violation be fined 600 to 800 euros, as will any person who encourages or assists such behavior. 
Labour and Social Policy Minister Xhelal Bajrami said the new law is a major step towards strengthening democracy. 
 "We hope that when citizens feel discriminated in any way, they will contact the Commission ... it will process all complaints and will instruct institutions, government authorities and the private sector to act upon its findings," he said. 
Ombudsman Ixhet Memeti explained that in the absence of a legal framework in the past, citizens could submit complaints based on the Ombudsman Law. 
 "The number of complaints which totaled 20 last year is small, not because there is no discrimination but because citizens probably do not recognise it in most cases," Memeti said. 
Macedonia's approach was modeled after neighboring Serbia, where there also is a commission. It differs from that of Croatia, which grants authority to the Ombudsman in cases of government and private sector discrimination. 
Adoption of the law last year was marked by intense debate and criticism, coming mostly from the Macedonian Helsinki Committee. The latter objected to the law because "sexual orientation" was not explicitly mentioned as grounds for discrimination. 
The Labour and Social Policy Ministry took the position then that such discrimination is covered under the other, broader provisions of the law. 
Minovski explained to SETimes that they foresaw mechanisms for protection of every individual from any type of discrimination. 
 "If a person faces discrimination at work based on their homosexual orientation, the Commission will act according to the complaint, and if there are grounds, will decide on the steps for their legal remedy," he said. 
