27/09/2004
(EUobserver - 27/09/04; AFP - 26/09/04; EurActiv, RFE/RL - 24/09/04; EUpolitix - 23/09/04; Rompres -- 22/09/04 - 23/09/04)
Moving a step closer to meeting a key target on its road to the EU, Romania has closed two more chapters in its accession talks with the Union. Bucharest wants to complete the negotiation process by the end of 2004 and sign its Accession Treaty with the 25-nation bloc in the spring, before gaining full-fledged membership in 2007. 
On Thursday (23 September), Romania's chief negotiator with the EU, Vasile Puscas, said his country had finalised talks on the chapters regarding the free movement of services and on regional policy, bringing the number of closed chapters to 27 out of a total of 31. 
Completing talks on the regional policy chapter virtually assures access to a financial package totaling 5,974 billion euros that the EU approved earlier this year, to help Romania cover the cost of accession during the 2007-2009 period. 
"The funds will be directed to enhance economic competitiveness, human resources development, transport, energy and environment infrastructure, agriculture and fisheries, regional development, etc." Puscas said. 
By closing the chapter on the free movement of services "We have finalised the talks for all four freedoms that constitute the building block of the internal market of the EU," he added. "We have adopted and begun to apply the community acquis, meaning that we started the effective preparation for entering this market." 
The European Commission (EC) is due to publish its annual report on the country's progress towards accession on 6 October. The document is expected to say whether Romania is a functioning market economy -- a major economic criterion a candidate country must meet before joining the Union -- and whether it can finalise its negotiations with Brussels by December. 
Voicing confidence that the report would recognise Romania as a functioning market economy, Prime Minister Adrian Nastase was quoted as saying last week that his government had done "most of its homework for 2004". 
The remaining chapters cover the environment, competition and justice and home affairs. All are considered to be among the most difficult in the negotiating process. 
In last week's statement, Puscas noted also the progress made on the environment chapter during the latest round of talks. He said negotiators had found solutions "for five out of the 11 directives for which Romania requested transition periods", implying the provisional completion of half of that chapter. 
"Negotiations for this chapter were very intense," Puscas commented. "The acquis on environment is not easy to implement, and reaching the standards in this area entails high costs from the public administration and private companies." 
The final chapter on "other matters" is treated differently from the other 30 negotiating chapters. It covers a range of largely uncontroversial issues that have already been negotiated and agreed upon between Brussels and the candidate countries. 
Bucharest is eager to conclude its negotiations during the mandate of the current EC, whose current five-year term of office expires at the end of October, less than a month before Romania's parliamentary and presidential elections on 28 November. 
