29/09/2011
By Tzvetina Borisova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 29/09/11 
Bulgaria has sold its state-controlled tobacco monopoly Bulgartabac after five unsuccessful attempts in the past 13 years. The deal, hailed by economists and the government, sparked protests by employees concerned that the new owner may cut jobs, despite assurances to the contrary. 
Under the 100m-euro agreement signed on September 13th between the Privatisation and Post-privatisation Control Agency and representatives of Austrian-registered BT Invest, 80% of Bulgartabac's shares will go to the firm, owned by VTB Capital, the investment arm of Russian state-controlled VTB Bank. 
In an official comment, VTB Capital's CEO Atanas Bostandzhiev said the buyer plans to invest about 1m euros in the Bulgarian producer in the first year of operations, followed by another 5m euros in the coming years. 
"VTB Capital's strategy envisions further expansion of our business and entering new markets, including in Central and Eastern Europe," VTB Capital's press office told SETimes in the statement. Bulgartabac refused to comment. 
The contract has several clauses included at the insistence of labour unions representing the workers in Bulgartabac's three working factories -- in Sofia, Blagoevgrad and Pleven. These clauses guarantee the new owner will not change the company's main activities over the next ten years and will not allow its liquidation or insolvency. 
Furthermore, the buyer will not reduce its stake in the company over the next five years and will not be allowed to make any structural changes or transformations within the group. It will also have to buy 5,000 tonnes of Bulgarian tobacco a year. The third condition is to maintain the average annual number of employees in Bulgartabac and its subsidiaries and to keep employment at 2010 levels. 
Despite this, hundreds of Bulgartabac workers staged several protests shortly after the deal was announced in early September, arguing the competition for Bulgartabac's sale was manipulated in favour of BT Invest, which was the only remaining candidate. They also argued the compensations that the new owner would have to pay in case it fails to fulfil its social commitments are minimal. 
The protestors also expressed their concern that despite the ten-year ban on reselling the holding, there is nothing that prevents BT Invest from changing its owner. 
Indeed, BT Invest was the only remaining candidate in the final stage of the competition. Earlier in the bidding process, there was a second candidate -- British American Tobacco, which was a strategic investor. BAT ended up withdrawing its offer, explaining it was not in line with the company's strategic financial plans. 
Despite all the speculation about the buyer and its reasons for acquiring the tobacco holding, economists believe the deal is good for Bulgaria, especially given the need for revenues. 
According to Desi Nikolova, chief economist at the Institute for Market Economy, "each privatisation contract is good." 
"Obviously, there was no great interest, and the very fact that a deal has been reached is good news," she told SETimes. She describes the price as "reasonable" when compared to the capitalisation, because it is actually higher. "The capitalisation of 100% of Bulgartabac is 100m euros; in this case, we sold 80% for 100m euros, which is a good price," she notes. 
