18/10/2005
(Various sources -- 17/10/05 - 18/10/05)
The World Health Organisation (WHO) warned people Monday (17 October) not to succumb to panic and rush to buy the antiviral drug Tamiflu to protect themselves against bird flu. 
"WHO at this point does not advise for individuals to stockpile this drug for any purpose," Michael Ryan, WHO's pandemic alert chief, said Monday. "There is no indication at this stage for anyone to be taking this drug other than the very high-risk groups in areas in which the avian disease has become a problem," he added. 
At the same time, WHO warned that bird flu is likely to appear in other countries, following recent outbreaks in Turkey, Romania and most recently, Greece. It advised governments to build up supplies of Tamiflu, which could reduce the effect of the illness in the event of a human flu pandemic. 
Greek experts are presently conducting tests to discover whether a case of bird flu at a turkey farm on the Aegean island of Oinouses involves the lethal H5N1 strain, which has led to more than 60 deaths in Asia. The strain was identified in several locations in Turkey and Romania last week. 
The spread of avian flu has been attributed to bird migrations. Advising people to "limit their contact with dead or sick birds," Ryan also stressed, "Not every death of a bird in the world is necessarily avian influenza." 
People living in close contact with poultry are believed to be at highest risk. Although human-to-human transmission has been extremely limited, scientists worry that H5N1 could eventually combine with its human variant and mutate into a highly infectious and lethal flu capable of killing millions of people worldwide, as in the 1918 influenza pandemic. 
"Maintaining vigilance is going to be a long and exhausting process," Ryan said. "Nobody can say with any certainty when a pandemic virus will emerge." 
He also praised Turkey and Romania for their efforts to contain the spread of the disease by imposing travel restrictions on affected areas and taking other measures, including the culling of thousands of birds. 
The EU has ordered member states to take a series of precautionary steps to restrict the spread and possible mutation of bird flu. It also has sent experts to Turkey, Romania and neighbouring Bulgaria. No cases have yet been reported in the latter country. 
Noting that the incubation period for the bird flu detected in the village of Kiziksa, some 120km from Istanbul, had passed, Turkish veterinarians say they believe the H5N1 outbreak has been contained and there is no danger of it spreading. 
But authorities remain on alert as more migratory birds are expected in the region for the winter. 
