22/03/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 22/03/10
The leaders of Western Balkan nations -- all but a recalcitrant Serbia -- met in Slovenia on Saturday (March 20th) to discuss the importance of EU membership. Organised jointly by Slovenia and Croatia at the Brdo castle near Kranj, the conference was attended by Albania and all former Yugoslav states but Serbia. 
Arriving back in Pristina on Sunday night, Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci hailed the conference as successful for the entire region, but especially for an independent Kosovo, which was seated as an equal. 
It was precisely that notion of equality that kept Serbian President Boris Tadic from attending. The absence of Serbia -- from which Kosovo declared independence two years ago -- drew no public comments from other leaders. Serbia is the largest of the Western Balkan nations. 
When Thaci gave his conference speech, Nikola Spiric, prime minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), left the room because BiH does not recognise Kosovo. When Thaci finished, Spiric returned to his seat alongside him. 
In Belgrade on Sunday, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said the conference's goal of EU integration is an important, shared objective. But he called the summit itself a disappointment. 
Serbia would have attended, Jeremic said, if Kosovo had been represented as a UN protectorate rather than an independent state. Serbia, said Jeremic -- echoing repeated statements by Tadic -- will never recognise the independence of Kosovo. 
 Summit participants adopted a final declaration expressing optimism that the Western Balkans will not only become an integral part of the EU but will have much to offer Europe. 
"The crucial problem of the region is that everybody needs to recognise everybody," said Slovenian Prime Minister Borut Pahor, the summit co-host, without referring specifically to Serbia. "The necessity of a mutual recognition is the open issue that blocks the integration process." 
Croatian Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor gave her counterparts a CD with the Croatian translation of acquis communautaire -- the body of EU laws compiled so far -- to facilitate integration for future EU candidates. Croatia spent 8m euros on the translation of the bloc's statutes. 
 "I call the leaders of the region to be more courageous," said Kosor. "The message we wanted to send from this conference was honest support to the integration process of southeastern Europe. We want to construct, not destruct." 
European Council President Herman van Rompuy was represented at the summit by EU Enlargement Commissioner Stefan Fuele. 
