31/03/2008
By Ivo Scepanovic for Southeast European Times in Tivat – 31/03/08
High-frequency noise caused by older Russian airplanes disturbs tourists in the Montenegrin coastal city Tivat, often shaking houses in the area and the nearby bay of Boka Kotorska. Media reports say the noise even triggers car alarms. 
The Montenegrin government has suggested that the Russian airliners land at Podgorica Airport. It has the capacity to handle more aircrafts and the noise would not adversely affect the tourist industry as much. 
 However, the government does not want to give up the two Russian airplanes too quickly as the Ilyushin 86 and Tupolev 154 together carry an estimated 100,000 Russian tourists to Montenegro annually. 
Tourist agencies that bring Russians to the so-called Montenegro Riviera openly oppose the ban. They like to use the two Russian aircraft because of their low cost maintenance and passenger capacity. 
According to the Montenegrin media, the government will first attempt to move the Russian aircraft from Tivat to the Podgorica Airport this summer, but it will also consider a full ban of the Ilyushin 86 and Tupolev 154 for 2009. Meanwhile, the government will give tour operators time to consider alternatives to the Russian airliners. 
A ban would force Russian tourists to travel a half hour from the Podgorica Airport to the coast. Despite the possible effect this increased travel time might have on tourism, local authorities in Tivat and the general public support preparations for the ban, given the noise. 
All signs indicate that the additional travel time will not affect tourism. Association of Tourist Agencies in Budva head Snezana Vejnovic, for instance, announced that Russian tourists have again expressed interest in travelling to Montenegro this year. 
''Many have booked their holidays early, at the beginning of the year, despite the fact that prices increased from 10% to 20% in comparison with last year,'' said Vejnovic. 
In fact, many Russian tourists are looking for possible property investment opportunities. 
Montenegro reported 2.3 million registered foreign tourists last year. Additionally, the World Tourism and Travel Council has announced that in the next ten years, the tourist industry is estimated to expand 10% annually. 
