11/03/2009
By Martin Martinoski of the Ministry of Finance in Skopje -- 11/03/09
Following its success in introducing the flat tax, when the state saw an increase in budget revenues despite the reduction of the profit tax and personal income tax rates to only 10%, the Republic of Macedonia introduced one more comprehensive fiscal reform -- namely, social contribution reform, launched on January 1st 2009. It is one of the most complex attempts at reform ever implemented in Macedonia. Its implementation involves many government institutions and funds, all co-ordinated by the ministry of finance. 
The reform is a complex set of measures comprising three main components, above all aimed at creating a better business environment for both the employers and the employees. 
The first element comprises the gradual reduction of social contribution rates by one-third in a period of three years -- that is, from the previous 32% (of an employee's gross income) to 22% in 2011 (27.9% in 2009 and 24.7% in 2010). Thus, labour costs are additionally reduced, the competitiveness of companies in Macedonia is enhanced and possibilities for attracting new investors, who, in times of crisis, seek the best conditions for capital return, are created. 
The second segment is the introduction of the gross salary concept. This principle of calculating salaries is applied in all modern market economies, and Macedonia was one of the last remaining countries in the region that had not introduced it. This measure yields many benefits for the employers, the employees and the system in general. With the gross salary concept in place, employers are provided a simplified procedure for calculating salaries, administrative costs are reduced and a clearer picture of labour costs is created. 
Employees, in turn, will gain full insight into whether their obligation is fulfilled, thus strengthening their feeling of a personal contribution to the mandatory social insurance system and creating direct linkage of the "cost", i.e., the paid contributions, with the right arising thereof. From the state's point of view, the change to the gross salary concept leads to a reduction of evasion (of payment obligations), thus ensuring stable financing of the health and pension system. 
The third important pillar in this reform is the integration of the collection of contributions within the Public Revenue Office (PRO). Prior to the reform, contributions were paid to different institutions. This situation led to discrepancies in the databases and a greater possibility of evasion of payment of certain contributions. Integration of the collection of those contributions reduces these risks, as well as the costs for the employers. 
With the change, employers now go to only one counter at the PRO, instead of several institutions. Indeed, they do not even have to do that, since salary calculations can be submitted electronically, thus saving additional time and money. 
During the reform's introduction, there were smaller technical difficulties, which are inevitable with such a complex changeover. This situation was abused by certain groups that probably felt threatened by this reform. These tried to create, through some media outlets, panic and resistance among the public. 
However, technical problems were soon overcome, and it appears that the system functions in 99% of the nation's companies. Macedonia has shown it has a strong capacity for reform and has taken a significant step forward in creating a functional market economy. 
