16/02/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/02/10
Serbia's path to joining its neighbours in the EU is clear, Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic told a crowd in Belgrade who came out to celebrate Statehood Day on Monday (February 15th). 
"Today, no one questions Serbia's European path, we are getting closer to EU membership and ties with the world that had been cut for years are now being re-established," Cvetkovic said. 
Serbs took to the streets to celebrate their statehood, the Orthodox holiday of Sretenje and Army Day. 
February 15th was proclaimed Serbian Statehood Day on July 10th 2001 in honour of the beginning of the First Serbian Uprising in the small town of Orasac, led by Djordje Petrovic Karadjordje, on February 15th 1804. 
That same day in 1835, the first Serbian Constitution -- the Constitution of Sretenje -- was proclaimed in Kragujevac. 
The Serbian Army has also been celebrating February 15th as its day since 2007. Sretenje was chosen as Army Day because the military victories in the First Serbian Uprising [1804] paved the way for the creation of the Serbian army and state in the 19th century. The date also commemorates the appearance of the first organised forms of armed forces of the future Serbian state. 
In celebration, a number of events have been staged in the past week, many driving home the same message: Serbia's aim is membership in the EU, as well as the peaceful preservation of sovereignty in Kosovo. 
"Kosovo is a security issue of importance not only to Serbia, but for the entire region as well. We will remain adamant in fighting for our legitimate goals before the International Court of Justice, peacefully, patiently and persistently," Cvetkovic said. 
 He added that Serbia wants to become a regional leader, a role, he said, that is realistic given the country's potential. 
President Boris Tadic stressed the government's commitment to fighting organised crime and called on other South East European countries to join Serbia in the effort. 
"All security forces in Serbia will take part in the fight against organised crime. Peace with everyone -- war on organised crime," Tadic said. 
Tadic, who is also chief commander of the armed forces, reiterated that Serbia's Army should be a paid, fully professional force by next year. He vowed to continue military reforms despite the economic crisis and to bring the army in line with international standards. 
Commenting on co-operation between Serbia and NATO, Tadic said that parliament's Declaration of Military Neutrality will not change during the current government's term in office. 
Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac said he was pleased that the army -- along with the Serbian Orthodox Church -- is perceived by the public as one of the most trusted national institutions. 
"Restoring faith in the armed forces was one of the objectives of the security system reform, which will be complete once the professionalisation process wraps up," Sutanovac said. 
