27/03/2012
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/03/12 
Eight months after Kosovo approved a witness protection law to keep whistle-blowers protected from organised crime and corruption, the law has yet to be implemented because authorities haven't settled on some of its details. 
It's a problem facing many Balkan nations. The Council of Europe stated in December that while many western Balkan nations have passed similar laws, only Croatia is considered a country with an advanced policy and proper execution of the witness protection law. 
Kosovo officials say their witness protection law probably won't be put into effect until 2013. The interior ministry said the law is being executed partially, but the most important aspects are not. 
"The full implementation of the law will begin after the Unit for Witness Protection is established and the law is completed with other legal acts," Interior Ministry spokesman Behar Haziri told SETimes. 
Arben Gashi, chairperson of parliament's legislation committee, told SETimes that the delay is unjustified. The fact that the law was adopted in the assembly means the government must start enacting it, he said. 
"The law implementation impacts the fight against organised crime. The witness protection depends on the implementation of that law," he said. "The implementation is a responsibility of the mechanisms that execute it, because witnesses of the fight against crime and organised crime will face consequences." 
The ministry blames the delay on money, since witness protection requires considerable financial assistance. Based on the nature of the cases, witnesses might be subject to foreign deportation, change of identity or even plastic surgery. 
Gashi said the government must provide the money as envisioned by the law, because of the programmes' importance in the fight against crime. 
The EU office in Kosovo shares the same sense of urgency. 
"Implementation of this law is of great importance as witness protection is a cornerstone of any functioning judicial system. As such, its swift implementation will be critical for Kosovo's EU aspirations," EU office press officer Syzana Bytyqi told SETimes. 
The interior ministry has received assistance from the EC on a regional project to strengthen capacities in dealing with the protection of witnesses, and will seek co-operation with foreign countries in the process of the law's enactment. 
EULEX is assisting the ministry in this phase also. "EULEX's Witness Security Unit (WSU) is co-operating with the ministry of internal affairs and the Kosovo police in the development of local capacity. It has representatives in the working group, set up to develop the sub legal acts necessary for introducing the legislation," mission spokesperson Blerim Krasniqi told SETimes. 
"While Kosovo is in the process of developing its own witness protection programme, EULEX has its own Witness Security Programme operating in Kosovo and beyond," he added. 
Krasniqi said the programme has been repeatedly tested and many have and are using it. A critical moment for EULEX was last year's suicide of Agim Zogaj in Germany. He was a protected witness in the war crimes trial in the Klecka case against former Transport Minister Fatmir Limaj and nine other former Kosovo Liberation Army members. 
