02/08/2010
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 02/08/10
Will Greece's financial meltdown and subsequent bailout by the EU make the bloc more skittish about the enlargement process in the Balkans? Some political analysts in Montenegro think so. 
"Unfortunately, the effects of the crisis in Greece will be a significant measure and could dampen the process of association," European Movement in Montenegro Secretary-General Momcilo Radulovic said. "The scope of the crisis requires that leading EU structures are focusing on precisely those processes, not the process of accession of new members." 
Public opinion in some EU countries is souring towards enlargement due to frustration over the economic situation, he said. "That can turned into an attitude of political isolationism, and of course there is the implication that the newly acceding Western Balkan countries are unstable and do not have favourable prospects." 
Ivan Jovetic, an analyst at the Institute for Strategic Forecast and lecturer at the University of Donja Gorica, believes delays in the enlargement process are possible, but that the goal will not ultimately be abandoned. 
"Too much energy, resources and creativity have been invested in the European integration project for it to be put aside," he told SETimes. "In addition, the integration of the Western Balkans is a security question that EU has to solve permanently." 
"Only with the Western Balkans in the house is the EU is geographically and geo-strategically complete," Radulovic said. "A steady and stable Balkans means a stable EU, where the issues with political stability and security in a significant and turbulent region are resolved." 
As for Montenegro, he said accession would mark the "maturation of its society" and push it toward further development and progress. 
"Montenegro will profit from the EU in political and economic, and security, but primarily cultural and civilization way," he said. "Our companies will have access to a vast market, it will increase their competitiveness and business standards, and provide access to new technologies and exchange of experience. Meanwhile, our farmers will get an opportunity to use the huge subsidies and incentives provided by the EU." 
According to Radulovic, the crisis in Greece and developments in the EU will not affect the Montenegrin government's agenda. Integration, he said, is still crucial. 
Jovetic agrees, saying entry into the bloc will help Montenegro achieve its overarching goal of building a prosperous society. 
"In the context, EU membership is not a priority [in itself], but a mechanism to create and increase wealth," Jovetic said. "The realisation of this goal is an ongoing process, and its most important part of the application is the concept of microstates -- small, but strong states that will contain only basic functions, and in which there will be rule of law, protection of property rights, the withdrawal of the state from business, ease of initiation and termination of business, and increased economic freedom. 
"After that will enter into NATO and the EU, precisely in this order," he added. 
