10/10/2006
(AP, Reuters, CNN, BBC, The Guardian, Nine o'clock - 10/10/06; AFP, International Herald Tribune, VOA, RFE/RL, Rompres, HINA, Sofia News Agency, BNN, ANA-MPA, UN News Centre, NATO, Washington File, British Foreign and Commonwealth Office - 09/10/06)
Several Balkan countries, including Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece and Romania, joined international condemnation of North Korea for conducting a nuclear weapons test Monday (October 9th). The reclusive nation's move angered even its closest ally, China. 
Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis said her country "condemns such a provocative action, which contravenes the Nuclear Arms Non-Proliferation Treaty, ignores UN Security Council resolution 1695 and constitutes a threat to international stability, security and peace". 
The Bulgarian foreign ministry, which summoned the North Korean ambassador to Sofia to request more details, issued a statement saying the test "poses a threat to international peace and security and seriously undermines the international community's efforts for achieving a peaceful solution to the problem of the North Korean nuclear programme". 
In Romania, the foreign ministry called for international measures to ensure global peace and stability. 
"North Korea's commitment to exercises of force, by testing nuclear weapons, blatantly runs counter to the pledges made by Pyongyang to making the Korean Peninsula nuclear-weapon free, while at the same time defying the international community's repeated calls for a peaceful resolution of regional security issues," the ministry said. North Korea is a poor country that should focus on economic development, the HINA news agency quoted Croatian President Stipe Mesic as saying. 
Nobody is threatening North Korea today and it should redirect its nuclear potential, he added. 
The underground test, reportedly conducted in North Korea's Hamgyong province, was detected by the sensors at the Romanian seismic stations of Cheia and Bucovina, according to the Rompres news agency. 
The size of the bomb has not been determined. However, Russia said its estimated force was somewhere between 5 kilotonnes and 15 kilotonnes. 
"This action violates international norms of disarmament and non-proliferation, as well as the current international moratorium on nuclear testing," UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan said in a statement issued by his spokesman on Monday. "It aggravates regional tensions in and around the Korean Peninsula, and jeopardises security both in the region and beyond." 
"It is not only a threat to regional peace and security, it is a threat to world peace and security and will demand the strongest possible reaction from the international community," NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said of the test. 
Describing Monday's nuclear test as a "flagrant and brazen" violation of international opinion, the Chinese government voiced its "firm" opposition and called for an appropriate UN response, excluding military action. 
On Tuesday, the Security Council was scheduled to discuss a draft resolution calling for tough punitive action against North Korea. The proposed measures reportedly include halting trade in weapons-related material, placing all cargo going in and out of North Korea under international inspections, imposing a freeze on any transfer or development of weapons of mass destruction and a ban on the import of luxury goods. 
"We're working on a set of measures that will really make the North Koreans regret what they've done, and more importantly, that will protect us from what they've done," the lead US negotiator with Pyongyang, Christopher Hill, was quoted as saying. "We're just not going to accept that North Korea, with its starving population, is going to be able to join the nuclear club. We're going to work very hard to make sure North Korea understands the cost of this." 
