15/04/2010
(AP, AFP, Reuters, Deutsche Welle, Fena, MIA, B92, Transitions Online - 14/04/10)
Ivo Josipovic became the first Croatian president to apologise publicly for his country's role in the bloody 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), warfare in which about 100,000 people, mostly Bosniaks, were killed. 
Josipovic made the apology Wednesday (April 14th) in an address to the BiH parliament. 
 "I deeply regret that Croatian politics contributed to the suffering of people and to divisions that are still tormenting us," said Josipovic at the start of his first official visit to the neighbouring nation, a two-day trip. 
Josipovic said it is time for Bosniaks, Croats and Serbs to rise above suspicions and fears and to forgive one another. 
Echoing Serbian reformist President Boris Tadic's remarks in Mostar on Tuesday, Josipovic said countries in the region should put the past behind and focus on their shared goal of Euro-Atlantic integration. 
"A new era has come, which requires new politics," he stressed. "Instead of old conflicts and confrontations, Croatia is ready to provide wholehearted support and assistance to Bosnia on its way towards the European Union and NATO." 
The 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement ended the conflict in BiH and left the country split into two autonomous entities -- the Serb-run Republika Srpska and the Muslim-Croat Federation of BiH. 
Increased political tensions among the country's main ethnic groups in recent years have led to a significant slowdown in its EU accession progress. In his speech, Josipovic urged Bosnian Croats, who are pushing for their own entity within BiH, to abandon that idea. 
Croatia is a NATO member and hopes to join the EU by 2012. 
"The Croatian accession project will not be complete until our neighbours are included, particularly Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro," Josipovic said. "We have to … overcome our doubts and fears and get out of this vicious circle." 
Speaking after his meeting with the members of the Bosnian tripartite presidency, Josipovic said that Zagreb wants BiH to be a stable, functioning state that achieves the goal of joining NATO and the EU. 
While Bosnian Muslims and Croats fought together against Bosnian Serbs throughout most of the conflict, they fought against each other in 1993 and 1994. 
On Thursday, Josipovic is scheduled to visit the village of Ahmici in central BiH and become the first Croatian leader to pay tribute to the more than 100 Bosniak civilians killed there by Bosnian Croats in April 1993. 
He will then travel to the nearby village of Krizancevo Selo, where Bosnian Muslim troops killed about 70 ethnic Croats in December the same year. 
The only sin of the victims of both incidents was "that they belonged to the other side and were different", Josipovic said on Wednesday. 
