10/10/2006
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 10/10/06 
The UN war crimes tribunal has convicted Momcilo Krajisnik and sentenced him to 27 years in prison for crimes against humanity committed during the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). The former president of the Republika Srpska (RS) parliament, Krajisnik is a former close associate of one of the world's most wanted fugitives, Radovan Karadzic. The trial was considered one of the most important in the history of the UN court. 
Krajisnik was found guilty of persecutions, extermination, murder, deportation and forced transfer of non-Serb civilians. However, the Trial Chamber found prosecutors had not proved him guilty of the most serious counts in the indictment -- genocide and complicity in genocide. 
The verdict established that Bosnian Serb leaders conducted a joint criminal enterprise with the goal of ethnically recomposing parts of BiH by drastically reducing the proportion of Bosnian Muslims and Bosnian Croats. 
"Krajisnik gave the green light to start the programme of expulsion during the session of the Bosnian Serb Assembly when he called for implementation of what had been agreed -- ethnic division on the field," said the president of the Trial Chamber, Alphons Orie, as he read the verdict. 
The trial began in February 2004, after more than four years of waiting. The defendant stated that he had trouble locating witnesses because many are "in the woods or hiding so far underground that even SFOR cannot reach them". 
Testimony given by former RS President Biljana Plavsic was considered key to the case. Plavsic, who is serving an 11-year sentence after pleading guilty to war crimes charges, told the court that Krasnijik was one of the most influential figures during the BiH conflict. 
"Thanks to his ability to be very practical and real, I think he dominated in some things compared to former RS President Radovan Karadzic," she said. 
Krasnijik's 27-year sentence has been criticised across BiH for different reasons. Munira Subasic from the Srebrenica Mothers' Association views it as far too lenient. "I feel even more humiliated and a greater victim. With these trials and convictions I will never find my son." 
Leading RS politicians, on the other hand, say the punishment is too harsh because Krajisnik was only a parliament president. 
Krajisnik's family has announced that it will appeal the verdict. The prosecutor's office may do the same, because it had asked for a life sentence. 
The Hague tribunal has found 49 defendants guilty so far, while another 23 remain on trial. Among the six defendants not yet arrested are Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic. 
