02/07/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 02/07/10
More than 20 counties in Romania have been affected by heavy rains and deadly floods over the last week. At least 22 people are dead after swollen rivers overflowed and swept away villages. Suceava, Botosani and Neamt in northeast Romania have taken the hardest hit. 
 Authorities were generally quick to intervene -- 13,000 people were evacuated after several dams burst on the Siret and Prut rivers that cross the eastern historical region of Moldova from north to south. 
Despite the concerted intervention by 3,000 personnel of state agencies --emergency situation units, gendarmes, police officers, supported by military troops -- the government blamed the national weather authority for issuing the wrong alert codes in accordance with rainfall levels. 
"The local authorities have to be on the lookout because, even if there was a yellow code alert, in reality there should have been a red code alert. For instance, for the town of Dorohoi, yellow code alert means 20-40 liters of rain per square meter when in fact it was 163 liters per square meter," Interior Minister Vasile Blaga told the county prefects during a video-conference. 
 National Weather Authority Director Ion Sandu defended the forecasts his agency issued over the last weeks. 
 "When a yellow code is issued, nobody can tell whether it will rain 100 liters per square meter. Let's make one thing clear: we could have issued even a black code alert; people cannot be saved under these circumstances," he added, referring to the storms that battered the Moldovan town of Dorohoi, near the Ukrainian border. 
The weather agency issues three types of alerts -- yellow, orange and red -- depending on the intensity of the phenomenon, whether it is rain, snow or storms. 
Environmental Minister Laszlo Borbely conceded defeat at the hands of nature. "Despite the authorities' intervention, unfortunately we couldn't avoid the disaster caused by the flooding -- too much water fell in a too short a time," he said. 
The government assesses the damage at around 0.6% of the GDP. If it climbs above the 1% threshold, Romania will seek emergency assistance from the EU. 
The latest provisional review of the flood damage shows 160 localities have been affected in 22 counties -- 72 in Suceava County alone. More than 3,200 homes have been inundated -- almost 300 of them completely destroyed, while 15,000 hectares of arable land are underwater. 
"It rained heavily all day long last Monday. In the evening, I was watching the World Cup football game when I heard my neighbours screaming in the street 'the waters are coming'," Alexandru Suharoschi, a pensioner living in a district of Dorohoi, told SETimes. 
 "It all happened so quickly. We all perched on a hill nearby just to see the torrents rushing beneath our feet. A neighbour of mine, a 16-year-old boy, rushed to the fields to release his family's horses. He never returned. He was found dead the next day, a few kilometers away. Two old ladies were also swept away," he says. 
He is disappointed with how the authorities managed the situation. "First, no one warned us about the flooding. Secondly, had an evacuation operation been thoroughly organised by the town hall in time, maybe all the people could have escaped the torrents. But we were left to simply walk away from the disaster ourselves," Suharoschi said. 
His house is full of mud now and, despite the town hall inspectors having visited him, he doubts he will receive funds for repairs. 
The government will send emergency humanitarian aid worth 175,000 euros to the affected areas. Families who lost a member in the floods will get 1,200 euros per victim. 
