16/12/2011
Text and photo by Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/12/11
Kosovo can point to a success story when it comes to repatriating citizens who have gone abroad under disputed circumstances. The government has signed readmission agreements with 15 other countries, mostly in the EU. During the first ten months of this year, it brought close to 4,000 Kosovo nationals back to their home country. 
Dealing with the issue is a key condition which Pristina must meet in order to launch a dialogue with the EU on visa liberalisation. Kosovo is currently the only Balkan country excluded from the EU's free travel zone. 
For those forced to return to Kosovo, however, the picture is anything but bright. Employment is hard to find and the country lacks the means to provide long-term assistance. 
According to government records, 75% of those repatriated are Albanians, with ethnic Roma forming the second largest group. 
Fadil Hoxha, 32, left Kosovo in September 2009 with his wife and four children. He resided in Nice, France until July of this year. At that time, French authorities ordered him to leave the country, citing the readmission agreement with Kosovo. In September, Hoxha and his family arrived in Pristina. 
The decision, he told SETimes, was hard on everyone, especially the children. "I didn't risk spending around 13,000 euros, travelling through nightmare circumstances with my children, for a two year stay," he said with frustration. 
Having sold off his property in order to pay for the trip to France, the family now lives at an uncle's house in Pristina. 
Tefik Ismaili was among the first Kosovars experiencing the effects of readmission agreements. He was expelled from Sweden in December 2010, four years after arriving there. Social assistance was suspended to his seven-member family, and his only choice was to return voluntarily or be forcibly deported. 
"Just at the moment we had started to cope and enjoy some life there, we were told to leave the country and return to Kosovo," Ismaili told SETimes. Education assistance spelled out in the Repatriation Strategy has not been granted to his children, he says, and his wife needs medical treatment for psychological distress. She cried throughout the interview for this story. 
Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi says he understands the difficulties, but he urges Kosovars to stop seeking exile. "We don't want to see those people going back again, since political or economic exile status for Kosovars is over," Rexhepi told SETimes. 
From the standpoint of EU institutions, Pristina is on the right track. "Kosovo has made considerable improvement as regards reintegration of repatriated persons," the European Commission Liaison Office (ECLO) told SETimes. 
DCAM office head Islam Caka acknowledges that Kosovo is short of opportunities to employ the repatriated. Nor does it offer sustainable assistance over the long term. He told SETimes, however, that government assistance will continue for those families in 2012. 
This year, authorities earmarked 3.4m euros for the programme; next year, says Caka, it will be 3.2m. 
Mustafe Neziri is the responsible authority in the municipality of Pristina, which has the largest number of repatriated Kosovars. Neziri tells SETimes that biggest demands involve food. The action plan outlines food supplies for the repatriated, calculated for the number of family members and delivered over a two month period. 
The repatriated express some satisfaction with that aspect of the process, but see little else to smile about in the longer term. For some, the challenge of starting a new life abroad -- one more time -- is not out of the question. 
