03/04/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/04/07
Most Serbs support co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), but misinformation about war crimes issues remains widespread, according to a new survey commissioned by the Belgrade Centre for Human Rights and conducted by Strategic Marketing. 
Out of the 1,000 citizens polled, 69% said they backed Serbian co-operation with The Hague-based court. About 19% were adamantly against any form of co-operation. The study, conducted in December of last year, was released last month. 
Some 15% said co-operation should be maintained for the sake of justice, while 26% said it is necessary in order to move ahead with Serbia's EU bid. Minimal co-operation with the ICTY -- with the goal of avoiding sanctions -- was supported by 28%. 
Serbs remain ill informed about war crimes and tend either to deny Serbian involvement or minimise it, the poll found. For example, while 71% have heard of the Srebrenica massacre, more than half deny that Bosniaks were killed there in massive numbers. However, the percentage of those who acknowledge the atrocity has risen in comparison to 2005. 
The survey also assessed the human rights situation in Serbia, and found that conditions have deteriorated over the past year. The Roma are the most endangered group, suffering both discrimination and violence. Authorities react slowly or not at all, thus tacitly encouraging such behaviour, the survey found. 
According to the director of the Belgrade Centre, Professor Vojin Dimitrijevic, the UN Declaration on Human Rights was introduced into the Serbian Constitution in an unclear, hasty and non-transparent manner. 
"The current implementation of these regulations, which are potentially good, is increasingly dependent on the judiciary," he says. "Among other worries and preoccupations human rights are again close to the legendary pie in the sky." 
Analysis of the media shows increased pressure by the government and influential groups, according to the Centre. While coverage of domestic human rights problems is minimal, media reports pay great attention -- most of it negative -- to the ICTY and the UN administration in Kosovo, with particular focus on the problems of Serbs. 
