01/06/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 01/06/10
After five years of debate, the Romanian parliament's lower chamber has passed a lustration law, and most expect President Traian Basescu to sign it. But the vote provoked little enthusiasm among those who have been waiting 20 years for such a measure. 
 Former opponents of the communist regime and participants of the 1989 revolution say it is too little, too late. Besides the long wait, they say, the law that was finally adopted is too lax. 
 "It is a hoax; it is a decision which only misleads the public opinion," former political detainee Vasile Paraschiv told SETimes. 
 "This law is a simple formality which doesn't touch anyone because it doesn't envisage the majority of the culprits, but only a handful of former communist second-rank dignitaries," he added, referring to a clause that says dignitaries currently in place cannot be lustrated while still serving in their posts. 
Paraschiv, 82, was one of the first people during the communist regime to openly advocate free and democratic labour unions. His actions triggered persecution by the Securitate, which forcibly admitted him to psychiatric hospitals -- a dreaded political weapon in those times. 
"With this maimed law, [politicians] are trying to restore their image capital they have constantly lost over the last 20 years. They meant it as an act of justice, but in reality this can't be done," the former dissident said. 
The law, passed by the Romanian deputies on May 19th by a 203-40 vote, bans any former communist dignitary and senior public servant from holding or running for public offices for a period of five years, once the law is promulgated. 
The ban also pertains to chiefs and deputy chiefs of the police departments and commanders of political detention centres. It obliges all the current high-ranking clerks to declare within 30 days after its enforcement if they held such positions between 1945 and 1989. 
The Social Democrats (PSD), the largest opposition party in Romania, said it would challenge the law before the Constitutional Court, arguing it encroaches on human rights because it stipulates collective, rather than individual, guilt. 
The party also says the ruling majority has protected Basescu from being lustrated in the future by adding a provision that says former diplomatic and commercial mission heads are not affected. Between 1987 and 1989, Basescu led the branch of the former state naval company Navrom, in the Belgian port of Anvers. 
Former President Ion Iliescu, who held important positions within the Romanian Communist Party (PCR) until 1984, harshly criticised the new law, which he labeled "a diversion" by the current leadership. 
 Iliescu risks losing his chairmanship of the 1989 Romanian Revolution Institute if the law takes effect. 
 "Between 200,000 and 300,000 people are still lustrable in this country," Teodor Maries, leader of the 21 December Association, the first organisation of the 1989 revolution fighters, told SETimes. 
 "It is true the law has more of a symbolic role, 20 years after, but it brings moral reparation to the victims of the former regime and, if properly applied, it can still make some heads roll," he said. 
