24/10/2007
By Bekim Greicevci for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 24/10/07
The latest round of direct talks between Pristina and Belgrade on Monday (October 22nd) in Vienna did not bring the two factions any closer to solidifying a deal on the province's status. Both parties say that the third face-to-face meeting was the most difficult since the beginning of the talks. According to local media in Pristina, the two negotiating teams had an angry debate on the future of Kosovo. 
The troika negotiating the talks -- comprised of EU, Russian and US envoys Wolfgang Ischinger, Alexandar Botsan-Harchenko and Frank Wisner, respectively -- presented the parties with 14 principal conclusions, which are meant to open a path to a solution for Kosovo status. 
The 14-point document, a copy of which was obtained by Southeast European Times, does not mention independence, but does say there will be no return of Kosovo to the pre-1999 status. "Belgrade will not govern Kosovo. Belgrade will not re-establish a physical presence in Kosovo," it reads. 
According to the troika, Belgrade and Pristina must focus on developing the relations existing between them especially in their historical, economic, cultural and human dimensions. "Belgrade and Pristina will solve future problems between them in a peaceful manner and not engage in actions or dispositions that would be regarded as threatening to the other side," one of the 14 points reads. 
Pristina must implement broad measures to enhance the welfare of Kosovo Serbs, as well as other non-Albanian communities, through decentralisation of local government, constitutional guarantees and protection of cultural and religious heritage, the document says. 
The three envoys want the two sides to co-operate on issues of mutual concern, including missing persons and return of displaced persons, protection of minorities, protection of cultural heritage, economic issues, and the fight against crime -- particularly in the areas of terrorism, human, weapon and drug trafficking and organised crime. 
Pristina will have full authority over its finances, and Kosovo's EU Stabilisation and Association process will continue unhindered by Belgrade, the document reads. 
During the meeting this week, both parties responded to the troika's points. Kosovo Albanian leaders say that the document includes much of what Prisitna has proposed during the talks, but they also have expressed their disagreement with some of the points. 
 "Pristina cannot accept things such as a common fiscal policy and development of a joint economic growth and development strategy with Belgrade," a member of the Pristina negotiating team said. 
The Belgrade delegation presented a document to the group, which also contains 14 points. The Serbian working points reiterate Belgrade's long-established stance, opposing independence for Kosovo and offering broad autonomy instead. 
During meetings with Serbian officials on Tuesday, Italian Foreign Minister Massimo D'Alema urged Belgrade to seriously consider the new proposal. However, both Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and President Boris Tadic reiterated their opposition to granting Kosovo sovereignty, and warned against extending recognition to Kosovo is it unilaterally declares independence. The parties will continue their discussions in Vienna on November 5th. 
Igor Jovanovic contributed to this report 
