16/06/2006
(FIFA, National Geographic, BBC)
About one third of the world's population is expected to watch this year's World Cup, whether live or on TV, and many will be watching to see how well Croatia fares. The team's experiences at prior World Cups -- it has made it to the finals twice since the country gained independence -- have been alternately thrilling and disappointing. 
Croatia's first major championship game as an independent team was in 1996, at the European Championship in England. Two years later, at the 1998 World Cup in France, they made a historic entry into football's signature event. Coached by Miroslav Blazevic and made up of players with experience playing around Europe, the team achieved third place. 
The quarterfinal match with Germany remains, in the minds of many fans, the greatest the team has yet played. Down one player after Christian Worns picked up a red card, the Germans were rattled and dangerous, but Croatian goalie Drazen Ladic was able to fend off kicks by the legendary Bierhoff and Klinsmann, and Croatia triumphed 3-0. 
Many saw the victory as a replay of the 1994 World Cup, when Germany was given its ticket home by another Balkan nation, Bulgaria. For Croatian fans, it was also sweet revenge for the team's defeat to Germany at the Euro championship in 1996. 
"The team with heart" finally lost in the semifinal. Their dreams of making it all the way ended after 50 seconds, when Lilan Thuran scored the first goal for France, which prevailed 2-1. Croatia eventually finished in third place. 
The team's second appearance in the World Cup was in 2002, where they appeared in Group G with Mexico, Italy and Ecuador. Led by coach Mirko Jozic, the team suffered two defeats in the first round matches, sweetened only partly by a win over Italy. The team did not advance to the second round, disappointing fans. 
With coach Zlatlo Kranjcar at the helm, the team reached their third consecutive World Cup finals this year. They finished top in the European qualifying Group 8 -- with seven wins in ten matches. The most remarkable victory was over Sweden. Croatia lost a two-goal lead over Bulgaria to end in a draw, but subsequently racked up four successive victories between March and June of 2005. 
On Tuesday (13 June), the team played its first Group F match at the 2006 World Cup finals in Germany, losing to Brazil 1-0. Although they did not get the draw they were hoping for, the team kept up an unwavering force, and did not let the Brazilians get into their usual rhythm. 
On Sunday, Croatia will have chance to salvage their campaign in their first round match against Japan. Their final first round match, against Australia, is on 22 June. 
 SETimes correspondent Kristina Cuk contributed to this report.  
