27/07/2004
By Valentin Nesovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 27/07/04
Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski and EU security chief Javier Solana met at the weekend to discuss the government's power decentralisation package, which was submitted to parliament Monday (26 July) for approval. Under the planned decentralisation, some municipality boundaries would be redrawn to make Albanians within them a majority. This would give them greater control over local affairs. But opponents of the plan say it will divide the country along ethnic lines.
The package was agreed upon after long and difficult talks earlier this month between the partners in Macedonia's ruling coalition -- the Social Democrats, Liberal Democrats and the Democratic Union of Integration.
It is considered a key part of efforts to decentralise the political system and fulfil Macedonia's last remaining obligation under the Ohrid Agreement. However, its provisions have sparked heated debate and protests, including a violent demonstration in the western Macedonian town of Struga on Friday and a larger, peaceful one Monday in Skopje.
Struga is one of three municipalities -- the others are Kicevo and Skopje -- where changing the municipal borders has been a thorny issue. Under the plan, all three will see their demographic composition change as a result of new boundaries.
In accordance with the Ohrid Agreement, the plan requires municipalities with an ethnic minority totalling more than 20 per cent of the population to introduce the language of that ethnic community as a second official language along with Macedonian. Municipalities with a predominantly minority population would see control over schools and other institutions pass to minority representatives.
In Skopje, the size of the ethnic Albanian population is currently less than 20 per cent. Under the new territorial organisation plan, however, many villages from neighbouring municipalities would be attached to the capital, increasing the proportion of ethnic Albanians above the threshold necessary for introducing Albanian as the second official language.
Struga, meanwhile, will become a municipality with a majority ethnic Albanian population. Kicevo, also located in the west of the country near the Albanian border, will see no changes until 2008. At that time, four other municipalities will join the town, changing the ratio of ethnic Macedonians to ethnic Albanians.
Opposition parties, led by the VMRO-DPMNE, have reacted vehemently to the proposed changes, arguing that they will create "ethnic enclaves" and lead to federalisation of the country. Not so, says Prime Minister Hari Kostov, insisting that Macedonia will remain a single, sovereign, unitary country with full territorial integrity.
"Macedonia will not be separated, there will be no internal borders, no walls will be built and there will be no exchange of territories and people," Kostov says.
Nazmi Maliki, of the South East European University in Tetovo, agrees. "Territorial organisation should not be understood as a separation at any point, or that some will lose and some will gain."
