18/10/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 18/10/05
Under new regulations set to go into effect on 1 January 2006, Macedonians will pay an additional duty on imported goods deemed harmful to the environment. The tax mainly applies to second-hand products -- used cars, second-hand tyres, old batteries, used freezers, lubricants made of oil and bitumen with percentages of lead and sulphur above the permitted levels. 
But some new products -- such as cigarettes, bottles and plastic bags -- will also be subject to the eco-duty. It will give an added boost to a campaign initiated by the environment ministry this summer, aimed at promoting the use of cloth instead of plastic bags. In general, the ministry hopes the new rules will lead to a decrease in the use of environmentally unfriendly products. 
Members of the public, however, have expressed discontent, arguing that a new financial burden is being imposed amid already low living standards. Local taxi drivers, for example, say new cars are in short supply. They have mainly relied on imports, which are already barely affordable, and which now will become more expensive. 
Under the regulations, the environmental duty on imports of used passenger diesel cars will be between 65 euros and 98 euros depending on the power of the engine. Duties for used petrol-driven cars are lower and will be between 41 euros and 82 euros. A used car for transportation of ten or more people will be subject to an additional fee of 100 euros. The eco-duty on imports of used diesel trucks with a capacity of 20 tonnes will be 203 euros. 
One euro per tyre will be payable on imports of used tyres for passenger vehicles, while for trucks and buses the amount will be 2.5 euros per tyre. Imports of used batteries will be charged 3.2 euros per tonne. The same amount will be charged for second-hand freezers up to 250 litres, and freezers of 340 to 900 litres will be taxed at 6.5 euros. 
Cigarette producers and importers will have to pay 0.016 euros per a pack or 1.6 euros for 100 packs. The eco-duty for plastic bags will be 1.5 euros per kg. Plastic bottles at production or import level will be subject to a charge of 0.16 per kg. 
