15/09/2010
By Ljiljana Smiljanic and Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo and Banja Luka -- 15/09/10
Campaigning has shifted to high gear ahead of the October 3rd elections, and a multitude of NGOs are equally fired up to influence voters. 
Faced with apathy, particularly among the youth, some groups are working hard to get young people energised and engaged. An estimated 50% of this demographic does not go to the polls. 
"Youth vote!" and "Women vote!" are some of the many slogans on billboards posted in cities around the country. Video spots featuring actors and other prominent people regularly appear on television, communicating a similar message. 
Some organisations, such as the Society for Responsible Business in BiH (DOP), say they even plan to organise conferences in which political parties -- particularly youth section representatives -- will address the specific problems facing young people. 
These will take place "without any political messages or campaigning", said DOP President Kenan Hodzic. 
Others, like the Alternative Club from Trebinje, are concerned with the ethical aspects of the elections. Club President Blazo Stevanovic has urged the public to report any candidate accused of, or prosecuted for, war crimes or organised criminal activities. 
 "In eastern Herzegovina we have already observed some [candidates] suspected of violating international humanitarian law, as well as charged with severe crimes," Stevanovic said. 
Analysts have mixed views concerning the role of the NGOs. Sociologist Srdjan Puhalo says the public information campaigns may produce some results but are unlikely to have a major influence. 
"No one will vote because of a billboard or a video, but because of an organisation with a good reputation that has proved itself through work. There are not many of those NGOs," Puhalo told SETimes. 
 Young people, he added, are mostly concerned with finding a job and improving their quality of life. "There are no ideals, only pure pragmatism," he said. 
Consequently, there are many more young candidates running for office than ever. However, the influence of young people and women in party politics is still weak. 
"They are not key players," he said. 
Sensing that apathy may have serious adverse effects on turnout and results, parties are using all possible means to reach voters, including the popular social networking site Facebook. 
All the major parties and their leaders in Republika Srpska (RS) now have profiles on Facebook. In addition, each party has an official website where visitors can easily review its platform and positions. 
 Internet campaigning, however, isn't going to sway the elections one way or another, analyst Tanja Topic tells SETimes. 
 "The internet in BiH is used very little compared to the neighbouring [countries] and the developed Western democracies. Those using the internet in BiH are usually the ones that would rather abstain than vote," Topic said. 
However, she added, it is an important step towards modernisation. 
The internet has already become the site of a fierce dispute between the Union of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) and opposition parties in RS. It was triggered by a website put up by opposition candidate Ognjen Tadic, which uses a URL that might lead visitors to think it is the official RS presidency site. 
The SNSD complained that the move is an attempt to "minimise the importance of the Office of the President of the Republic, and degrade the current President Rajko Kuzmanovic". 
"[Tadic] tries to fool citizens by creating a false picture of [himself as] a winner in the upcoming elections," said SNSD Executive Secretary Rajko Vasic. 
Tadic's campaign team responded that the disputed website is "original, legal, modern and prophetic", modelled after successful European and other international politicians. They added SNSD is annoyed because it can't prevent them from setting it up. 
RS opposition leaders have since launched an anti-Vasic blog on the country's biggest portal, Sarajevo-x.com. 
Meanwhile, some BiH politicians are using blogs to further their political careers and goals. More experienced bloggers include collective presidency member Zeljko Komsic and Party for Democratic Progress Vice President Branislav Borenovic. The SNSD's Vasic posts daily on his blog, discussing political events and sharply criticising political opponents across BiH. 
