09/02/2009
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 09/02/09
The Serbian dinar enjoyed a surge against the euro immediately after the announcement that Russia's Gazprom would pay 400m euros for a 51% stake in Serbia's national oil company (NIS). As of Friday (February 6th), 92 dinars equalled 1 euro, up from the all-time low of 96.3 to 1 set on January 28th. 
Nobody in Serbia expects the Russian purchase to restore the dinar strength seen in the first days of 2009, when 88.6 dinars could buy a euro. Experts predict the dinar's slide -- 24% versus the euro since October 1st -- to resume after two months at the most. The Turkish lira, the second fastest-depreciating currency in the region, fell by 17% in the same period. 
Serbian experts are divided on the real value of the dinar. Optimists think it should stabilise around 90 to 95 per euro, while pessimists frightened by the recession and falling exports fear the proper exchange rate is as low as 150 per euro. 
A weak exchange rate imposes real hardship on Serbia's citizens, companies and government. Heavily dependent on imports like other Southeast European countries, Serbia suffers high inflation if its dinar weakens. In addition, as inflationary expectations build, companies that import their raw materials raise their prices. Consumers who are paying house and car loans denominated in euros need to come up with more dinars too. 
Like its neighbours, Serbia has no easy cure for its fundamental macroeconomic imbalances. A lack of foreign investment and an 8.2 billion-euro trade deficit in 2008 compound the country's current-account deficit. 
Serbia's central bank is struggling to service the nation's foreign debt. Even with the Gazprom euro infusion, it simply lacks the assets to service foreign debt and prop up the dinar in perpetuity. The National Bank of Serbia (NBS) sold 1.2 billion euros in 2008 and 420m euros so far in 2009 to stabilise the dinar but to little effect. 
Furthermore, the NBS has effectively lost another weapon, the interest rate it pays to banks that buy dinar-denominated repurchase securities. Fearing recession, the NBS cut that rate, killing off any desire by banks to sell euros in exchange for dinars. 
NBS Governor Radovan Jelasic said the bank cannot keep defending the dinar. "These interventions are taking the place of planned privatisation revenues, foreign direct investment or new credits from abroad, which are the government's responsibility to obtain," Jelasic complained. 
The NBS warns the dinar's relentless plunge illustrates a serious defect in the economy and the need for Belgrade to stop spending money it doesn't have. Budget cuts, attractive conditions for foreign investment and growth of exports -- requiring an increase in product quality -- will stabilise the dinar and bring down inflation, it says. 
