15/12/2009
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/12/09
The second round of Kosovo's local elections was held on Sunday (December 13th) and according to preliminary results, Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) won the mayors' races in nearly half of the 21 municipalities up for grabs. 
President Fatmir Sejdiu's Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) came in second place, and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), led by Ramush Haradinaj, trailed in third, forming the main opposition. 
This time around, the PDK won in ten municipalities, while the LDK took five and the AAK scored three. Three other municipalities went to a member of the country's Turkish minority, a representative of the Serb Citizens' Initiative and an independent candidate. 
 In total, the PDK has 15 municipalities under its belt, followed by the LDK and AAK both with seven, and the Serb Liberal Party (SLS) with two. SLS candidate Bratislav Nikolic beat out the PDK's Beqir Fejzullahu in Shterpce after the party won one municipality in the first round. 
After the PDK and the LDK duked it out in Prizren, a major city in the southern part of the country, the results were too close to call. The CEC has to tally conditional votes, as well as those from citizens living abroad and with special needs, before releasing official results. Counting is expected to wrap up by the end of the week. 
Voter turnout was approximately 38%, a healthy number according to the head of the Central Election Commission (CEC), Nesrin Lushta. 
The European Network of Election Monitoring Organisations (ENEMO) said on Monday that voting procedures in the second round were more efficient than those in the November 15th round. 
ENEMO said the biggest challenges were the use of public money for political campaigns and a low level of participation by women in public institutions. 
EU Special Representative in Pristina Pieter Feith called the local elections an important step towards potential bloc membership. 
"I am satisfied that [the] elections in general were organised in a good constructive atmosphere, including all community members," he said in a statement. Despite the good news, the NGO Democracy in Action blew the whistle on a number of irregularities, such as double voting, bribes, ballot box stuffing, and electricity cuts at voting stations. 
The incidents "did not affect the results of the voting significantly", Democracy in Action's Ismet Kryeziu told Belgrade-based B92. 
According to B92, several incidents were reported, and police were asked to intervene at some polling stations. The broadcaster reported that a fight broke out in Malisevo, and four people were arrested in Janjevo for assaulting an LDK official. 
Albanian-language media covered the story of a PDK activist who was hit with a blunt object in Gnjilane after confronting a group of LDK supporters who were trying to tear down a campaign poster. 
