21/08/2012
By Muhamet Brajshori and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 21/08/12
Kosovo has been lacking accurate information on socially owned and municipal parcels for 13 years, ever since a large number of cadastral documents were transferred to Serbia during its departure from its former province in 1999. 
The absence of the documents, which are a comprehensive register of real property including ownership history, location, dimensions and value, has caused ownership issues in the country. 
Denis Pitarka, a spokesman for the Kosovo Cadastral Agency, told SETimes that Serbian authorities took documents of property changes with them in 1999. 
"In particular, records that are updated by the authorities of Serbia during the period 1990-1999 [were taken]. But in general we all have rebuilt municipalities' cadastres, where all properties are registered," Pitarka said. 
In some cases, courts have changed the ownership of land in Pristina. The municipalities are then bound to honour legality of the decisions. 
"We have information from people for areas which were known to be socially owned or municipally owned properties, etc., but those have undergone changes in the meantime by decision of the courts," Shiqeri Spahiu, director of the Cadastre at the Municipality of Pristina said. 
Belgrade and Pristina reached agreement on the cadastre in September 2011. Representatives of the Serbian office for negotiations with Pristina told SETimes that the agreement would, for the first time since 1999, enable Belgrade to participate in property-related court proceedings in Kosovo. 
Pitarka said that the problems that have emerged in defining properties are the consequences of a system that was inherited and of transformations to the new system based on market economy and private sector promotion. 
"The problems are still present, due to not completing the privatisation process and because the transition phase of Kosovo … has not been regulated," Pitarka said. 
Belgrade is accusing Kosovo of usurping Serb property and holding irregularly conducted privatisation. 
Aleksandar Vulin, the head of the Serbian Office for Kosovo, said his office would soon launch proceedings before the Constitutional Court of Serbia and international institutions for an assessment of the privatisation in Kosovo. 
"One cannot buy something that has been stolen. It must first be determined what belongs to whom, and only then can we think about privatisation. Privatisation in Kosovo was done in a mono-ethnic manner and the Serbs did not take part in it, which simply isn't sustainable," Vulin told Belgrade news agency Beta. 
Serbia has agreed to return the copies of those registries, but not the original ones, saying that only states can have cadastral registers. 
"In the case that Serbia returns the cadastral and property documentation in Kosovo, [the agency and other institutions] will face new challenges," Arta Gosalci, Kosovo Privatisation Agency spokeswoman, told SETimes. 
