11/10/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 11/10/11
The ongoing protests by Serbs in Kosovo's north have sparked serious security concerns for NATO troops deployed there. In part two of this exclusive interview with SETimes correspondent Linda Karadaku, General Erhard Drews calls for innovative solutions. 
 SETimes: What might be the solution in the north? What would be your role in that solution? 
 General Erhard  Drews: This is a complex situation that requires all actors to think about innovative approaches. Having said that, Kosovo is not the only place in the world where such situations exist. I am confident that, at some point, leaders will make the right decisions. 
The fact that Belgrade and Pristina are discussing technical issues within the EU facilitated dialogue shows me that progress is possible. In regard to the north, both sides have to work politically to find a way forward. Apart from contributing to a safe and secure environment, which is a precondition for successful political processes, KFOR has no role in that. 
 SETimes: Do you have contacts with the local population in the north? How do the people in the north react towards KFOR? 
 Drews: I believe that the people in the north of Kosovo know why we are there and what they can expect from us. Like everywhere in Kosovo, my troops are in communication with the people on the ground. This is key for any military operation: without contact with the people whose situation you want to improve you cannot be successful. Those that are seeking a peaceful way forward, and that is the majority, appear to see us in a positive light. Those that look to stirring up troubles do not like us very much. They know that we do not agree with their agenda and are ready to counter it. 
 SETimes: What is your assessment of the criminal groups in the north? How do you plan to deal with them? 
 Drews: It is not our place to investigate who was behind the violence. Crime is addressed by the police, not the military. However, any use of violence is unacceptable and KFOR will not tolerate a return to the clashes of the past. 
 SETimes: KFOR soldiers were injured in the latest clashes and Serb protesters as well. Do you expect an escalation of the situation in the north? 
 Drews: Injuries are always regrettable. However, sometimes this is the price you pay for doing your job. On the protestors' side, they knew exactly what our response would be and should therefore not be surprised. To KFOR, violence is unacceptable, regardless of which party, group or individual incites it. I urge everyone to put their efforts into talking to each other, not into confrontation. 
 SETimes: How do you assess the warnings of the Kosovo government to move ahead in its attempt to reinstate sovereignty in the north? 
 Drews: It is not for me to comment on political matters. Our mission is to ensure a safe and secure environment for all the people in Kosovo regardless of what ethnic group they belong or what their political views may be. Political problems need to be solved politically, and I am sure that the authorities in Pristina understand and appreciate this. 
 SETimes: Can you confirm there was a meeting between KFOR and KEK, the Kosovo Power Company, on the issue of Gazivoda Lake? What was discussed, what is the problem with Gazivoda Lake? 
 Drews: There has not been a meeting between KFOR and KEK. Reports indicating this are incorrect. 
 SETimes: Can you confirm it is the Serbs in the north who have stopped the water from Gazivoda Lake to KEK? If so, what can KFOR do? 
 Drews: I cannot confirm that Serbs in the north have stopped the water flowing from Gazivoda Lake to KEK. This is a matter of the company to determine. What I understand is that KEK is currently conducting maintenance work that impacts the amount of energy it can generate. 
 SETimes: Who is protecting Gazivoda Lake? How important is it as a security issue with implications for all of Kosovo? 
 Drews: There is no reporting on any threat to this lake nor do I consider it to be a security issue for Kosovo. In regard to its technical role for KEK operations, I would not like to speculate as I am not an expert. However, these are technical and not security issues. 
 To read the first part of this interview, click here.  
