12/07/2010
Photos and text by Ksenija Jurkovic for Southeast European Times in Sibenik -- 12/07/10
Sibenik hosted the 50th International Children's Festival from June 19th to July 3rd, aiming to recapture the event's past glory. This year, it saw far better organisation, a greater diversity of programmes, and a more varied selection of activities involving the children. 
Approximately 360 separate events were held in various indoor and open-air venues across Sibenik, with the participation of more than 2,500 artists from Croatia and around the world. Participant applications almost doubled this year compared to the festivals in the last 20 years. 
The spirit of the festival swept through every corner, street and square of the town's historic centre. Artists from around the world held performances for locals, random passersby and tourists. 
 The event opened with the raising of the festival flag in the historic square between Sibenik's renaissance Cathedral of St Jacob and the old city hall. President of Croatia Ivo Josipovic attended the opening. 
"A festival with so many children from around the world is the pride of Sibenik and the whole country," Josipovic said. 
The official programme of the Children's Festival opened with the play "Buratino" [The Golden Key] by A.N. Tolstoy, adapted by Croatian playwright Marijana Nola for the occasion. 
"We have been working on this play for almost half a year. It is a re-interpretation of the children's tale 'Pinocchio'," explained Nina Kleflin, the play director, adding that her team approached the project keeping in mind that it was to be performed for the festival's 50th jubilee. 
Jasenka Ramljak, manager of the festival's external programmes, said this year's event featured excellent performers. Participants included the ensemble Oplasteatro from Italy, Teater Grupen Batina from Denmark, Vaskakas Babszinhaz from Hungary, the Inis Eagle School of Irish Dancing, and Canada's Theatre Sun Ergos. 
The audience was especially impressed with the Croatian National Theatre from Split and its ballet performance of Tchaikovsky's "The Nutcracker". 
 "We performed here two years ago, but are always pleased to return to this square and dance for the children. This international festival is very important, and not only for Sibenik. It's generally important for children," said ensemble leader Lev Saposnikov. 
In his opinion, Croatia has very few theatre events for children. "The Nutcracker" is one of them and we are pleased that to have performed here," Saposnikov said. 
Street entertainers created a special atmosphere. They arrived from Switzerland, the United States, Canada, Macedonia, Portugal, Spain, Poland, Italy and Croatia, performing in virtually every square of the old town. 
A couple of US performers entertaining kept the central Medulic Square, packed with people during the entire festival. 
 "We are Christina and Seth from New York City. We met in Afghanistan, we were engaged in Scotland and got married in China, and now we're been looking for a country to have children in," they said, laughing. 
The two have performed in 13 countries. "We used to be acrobats and jugglers but we got injured. So we made a new show with water balloons," Christina said. "We wanted to have a show that isn't about love, so Christina said 'what about war?'," Seth said. 
The event has thrilled grownups as much as the children. 
"This event means a lot for Sibenik. It is a big event for the whole region. People come here from Zagreb, and as far as Australia, just to come to the festival," said Benjamin, a 29-year-old from Germany. 
"For the people of Sibenik, I think this is the only time in the year when they can see serious artists [in their town]. There are artists from New York, musicians from Poland and the people of Sibenik can see how big the world is during these two weeks. It is very nice." 
 Dana, an 8-year-old festival participant, agreed that this year's event was special. To her everything was "great!" 
In addition to various performances held daily throughout Sibenik's historic centre, children were able to participate in many workshops, express their creativity in art workshops, film and music workshops, doll-making, and, for the first time, the "Hands are Speaking" workshop for children with impaired hearing. 
 "We paint on walls with the little ones. The theme is free and the emphasis is on space," said Danijela Cikatic Javorcic, the head of the mural workshop. Marta Dujmovic, an 11-year-old from Split, said that she takes part in festival workshops each year. 
 "We draw the front of the boat and fishing net with fish, but we draw the details that not everyone sees and try to make the drawing special. I got this idea because I live on the coast and my grandpa has a boat," she explained. 
This year's event also hosted a children's book fair which opened with the presentation of the monograph Season of Joy that examines the history of the Festival since 1958. 
Croatian Radio Television produced a documentary about the very first festival, featuring Ljiljana Gospodnetic, who, as a little girl, was at the opening. 
The performance "Misevi i macke naglavacke" ("Mice and Cats Upsidedown") by the Croatian National Theatre from Varazdin closed the event on July 3rd. Just prior to the closing ceremony, on the Sibenik quay, children released air balloons and kites into the air. 
"The festival has fully met our expectations," said festival Director Dragan Zlatovic. 
 "Just the workshops of this year's programme, where children presented their creations in 21 workshops, we must be satisfied. And if we add to this all the performing arts and other types of programmes at the festival, I believe that we celebrated the festival's birthday in a worthy manner," Zlatovic said. 
