11/09/2008
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 11/09/08
Kosovo's prime minister is vowing stepped-up efforts to fight the grey economy in the newly independent country. "The prevention of the informal economy ... [is a basic priority] of the government I chair," Hashim Thaci told a conference on the prevention of financial crime, corruption and money laundering. 
Thaci said the government has four overall priorities: economic growth, implementation of the Ahtisaari plan, good governance and social stability.The government would not allow anyone to undermine the democratic future of the new state, he pledged. 
According to officials, the grey economy accounts for a considerable portion of GDP and is impeding the country's growth and development, as well as robbing the state budget of needed revenues. The government has established a working group, based on a programme currently in an initial phase, with the aim of thwarting the informal market. 
Corruption is hampering the fight against grey market activity, Thaci acknowledged. "Certain segments in the justice system have been sleeping on police files for eight years now," he said. "The Kosovo government will never compromise with those who are silent and hide crime or with those whose obligation is to fight crime, but who are silent or tolerate it." 
The European Commission (EC) says the grey economy in Kosovo represents 35% of GDP -- about 700m euros a year, according to the head of the EC's Liaison Office in Kosovo, Renzo Davidi. "The EU has assisted Kosovo with specific projects to fight the informal economy," the Kosovo Information Centre quoted him as saying. 
The EC's most recent report states that Kosovo lags behind its neighbours and that its economic growth is not keeping pace with its unmet development needs, even though year-on-year growth rates hit 3.9% in 2006 and 4.4% in 2007. 
"The enormous challenge Kosovo faces on the labour market is aggravated because currently some 30,000 young people enter the market every year," the EC warned. 
Economic growth is one of the basic challenges for authorities in Kosovo. Up to now, they have focused on politics and national security, but after the February 17th proclamation of independence, the public expects them to devote more attention to social and economic priorities. 
