16/04/2010
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 16/04/10
The Conference of Bishops of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) held its annual meeting in Mostar last month, a summit chaired by BiH's Catholic leader, Cardinal Vinko Puljic. 
The meeting assessed the conference's work during the previous year. Two other annual meetings are organised in Banja Luka and Sarajevo, each addressing current issues. 
"It was very productive and well-organised, addressing key issues," Puljic told SETimes."I am particularly thankful to the organisers for the hospitality shown in Mostar." 
This is Puljic's fifth and final year as Conference chairman. Replacing him will be Bishop Franjo Komarica, who will also serve a five-year term. 
Archbishop Alessandro D'Errico, the Apostolic Nuncio, conveyed Pope Benedict XVI's message to the gathering and provided a report of the work of the nunciature. 
According to Puljic, the archbishop reported that the Holy See is in the process of signing several agreements with the BiH government, including one on providing spiritual counseling for Catholic soldiers in the BiH military. 
Also present at Mostar were Bishop Ilija Janjic of the International Conference of Bishops based in Belgrade -- representing Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo and Macedonia -- and Bishop Slobodan Stambuk of the Croatian Conference of Bishops. 
 Puljic explained that a variety of Conference committees provided annual reports. The documents covered the bishops' work with the media; family; clergy; religious education; and the Catholic charity Caritas, among others. 
After hearing the report of the Conference's Justitia et pax committee, the bishops said they were concerned over an increased lack of fundamental rights and freedoms in BiH, and especially about prejudices affecting employment and the workplace. 
Amid the difficult political and economic situation in BiH, the bishops sent a message of hope, urging Catholics not to abandon BiH as their country and to hold on to their Croatian identity. 
Calling for "a just society with an emphasis on human and civil rights", the conference participants appealed to all BiH officials to more actively protect the rights of the Catholic Croats throughout the country and treat them as equal to Bosniaks and Serbs. 
Mostar Bishop Ratko Peric expressed concern about the declining number of Croats in BiH. 
 "Croats have been endangered since the beginning of the [1992-95] war, through the Dayton [Peace Accords] up to now," said Peric. "We have been reduced to a half; there used to be up to 830,000 of us, and now there are 450,000. This figure is constantly decreasing." 
The bishops also took a stand against announced changes in the Law on Residence and Domicile in Croatia. They believe the proposed changes create a perception there will be no future for Croats in BiH. 
The Conference expressed its gratitude to the relief organisation Caritas for helping the most disadvantaged, as well as organising a week of solidarity this year between the church and the people of BiH. 
