22/06/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 22/06/09 
The Serbian city of Novi Sad, about 80km north of Belgrade, hosted a Central European summit from Thursday (June 18th) to Saturday. Presidents from 14 states discussed topics such as European integration, the global economy and energy issues. 
Presidents from Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Italy, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Poland, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Slovenia, Ukraine and Serbia participated in the "Common Work on Overcoming the Challenges of the Three E's -- Economy, Energy and European Integration" summit. 
Leaders voiced their support for admitting Balkan countries to the EU, insisting the economic crisis should not be an excuse to stop Union enlargement. 
"The economic crisis is the crucial test that will show the EU members can act together," said Italian President Giorgio Napolitano. 
Serbian President Boris Tadic, who hosted the event, said integrating Western Balkan countries is in Europe's interest, and added that lifting visa restrictions in the region would be clear proof that Balkan states are welcome in the European community. 
Macedonian President Gjorge Ivanov agreed. "Many of us know personally what it is like to be outside of European institutions and European markets. One should not advocate an exclusive and closed Europe." 
Polish President Lech Kaczynski lent his support, recalling that Poland had spent 13 years "traveling" to the EU. "We have entered that room [the EU], but that does not mean we want to close the door behind us. That room is big enough and should be accessible to all," he said. 
Another issue on the table was the gas crisis between Russia and Ukraine, which came to a head in January, and demonstrated how vulnerable European states are due to energy dependency. 
Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko said his country guaranteed "safe and continuous" gas transit through its territory, and called for the creation of a joint gas market, similar to the electricity market. 
Security was tight in Novi Sad during the summit. Nearby streets were closed, and police units heavily guarded the hotels where the presidents stayed. 
