12/08/2009
By Sami Neza for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 12/08/09
Unlike Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia, there is no upcoming spot on the Schengen White List for Albania, as the country has not reached its destination on the EU "road map", failing to roll out biometric passports, beef up border control and combat corruption and organised crime. 
"Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina had the same main standards, the same 'road map', as Serbia, Montenegro and other countries. These countries had to commit [to] reforms, but [European] Commission experts noticed that they were not fulfilled," Lars Wahlund, deputy director of the EU department of Sweden's Ministry of Foreign Affairs told the BBC on Thursday (August 6th). 
"The lack of reforms by the country's politicians is not something that proves that the EU wants to isolate them, while visa liberalisation can not be given as a gift," said Wahlund. 
Although the Albanian government was disappointed over the "refusal", they have created an "action plan" in order to fulfill the remaining requirements, and promised the country will be visa-free in the not-so-distant future. 
The Inter-ministerial Commission for Integration met in June, trying to tool out ways to reorganise the Coast Guard, which oversees border control. The Coast Guard operates under two branches, a civilian leg controlled by the Interior Ministry, and a military leg that is part of the Ministry of Defence -- both of which will merge. 
The government also decided to pump money into combating corruption and organised crime. 
 At the end of July, about 80,000 applications had been received for biometric passports, since they started rolling out in February. 
 Armand Teliti, director of the Civil State Office, tells Albanian Public Television (TVSH) that within a year, nearly 1 million Albanians could get the new passports. 
"The requirements put on by the European Commission are fair, reasonable and it is upon us to fulfill them with the greatest seriousness," said Prime Minister Sali Berisha at a July press conference. 
For some, visa liberalisation is more than a luxury, as approximately 25% of Albanians have emigrated in the last 20 years, and a recent Gallup Balkan Monitor poll found 44% of Albanians have a relative abroad. 
"It is a deep human and social problem, which will gain the best answer with the removal of visas," said Berisha. 
Albania's exclusion from the White List prompted some citizens to take to the streets. A protest was held late last month in front of the EU mission in Tirana -- their slogan, "No new ghetto in the Balkans." 
Foreign Minister Lulzim Basha said he is optimistic that the EU will evaluate Albania this year and "open the doors for Albanians" soon. 
