21/01/2010
By Dimitar Bocevski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 21/01/10
Marriages between people of different ethnic and religious backgrounds in Macedonia remain rare but have increased since 2003. 
Sandra Gjorgevska, a resident of Skopje set to marry a fellow Macedonian at the weekend, said dating across ethnic lines is one thing: "But it is evident that when it comes to marriage, every bird tends toward its flock." 
According to a 2006 UNDP report, 78% of Macedonians and 86% of Albanians (the largest of Macedonia's minorities) oppose interethnic marriages. 
Sociologist Ilija Acevski said attitudes towards inter-ethnic marriage are purely prejudicial. "The act of a person marrying in such circumstances is viewed and felt as betrayal by his [or her] ethnic group." 
Acevski's research suggests that many do approve of inter-ethnic relationships -- as long as it's not within their own families. 
Religion seems to be a bigger barrier than ethnic origin. Macedonians, who are primarily Orthodox Christian, more readily marry Aromanians (Vlahs) and Serbs. Ethnic Albanians (mostly Muslim) are more likely to inter-marry with Turks and Bosniaks. 
On all sides, there are very few cases of inter-marrying with the Roma. 
Apparently, politicians have played up ethnic barriers to marriage for personal gain. After a 2001 insurgency by minority Albanians, politicians are believed to play the ethnic card for election without considering larger societal consequences. 
Political analyst and ethnic Albanian Albert Musliu says day-to-day politics and the growing presence of religious institutions greatly contribute to the marriage divide. 
 "I know of many couples which can not bridge that barrier аnd their relationship and love cannot be finalised by marriage because of the fear of stigmatisation and how they will face their loved ones," says Musliu. 
In a country with 2.1 million citizens, 2008 saw 137 marriages with a Macedonian groom and Albanian bride. This is generally attributed to an increase in men from rural Macedonia marrying women from Albania proper who are willing to live in villages. 
Spouses often view their decision as an act of courage. 
 Skopje resident Tanja explains she had a two-year relationship with an Albanian man, but hid his ethnicity from her parents until the couple was engaged. 
"When I summoned the courage to tell them, they were shocked and didn't allow me to get married. So I ran away from home and married him without my [family's] consent." 
The young woman, who does not regret her decision, was estranged from her parents for four years. The relationship began to mend when Tanja gave birth to a daughter. 
