17/03/2005
(MIA, Vecer, Macedonian TV - 17/03/05; Turkish Press, Turkish Daily News, MIA, Makfax, Dnevnik, Utrinski Vesnik, Reporter.gr - 16/03/05) 
Macedonian Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski invited Turkish businesses Wednesday (16 March) to invest in his country, promising Skopje's support for any measure that would boost bilateral economic ties. 
As of October 2004, Turkish investments in Macedonia totalled less than 16m euros, Buckovski said, as he opened a Turkish-Macedonian business forum in Istanbul. The two countries have great economic potential to boost bilateral co-operation, given their traditionally good political and cultural relations, he added. 
Macedonia's policy, Buckovski said, was based on four key principles: equal treatment of national and foreign investments, full protection of owners' rights, institutional transparency and rule of law. Authorities also plan to implement measures to further improve the business environment, providing opportunities for investing in the country's telecommunications and energy sectors, the gas and oil industry and tourism. He also cited the possibility of joint Turkish-Macedonian participation in construction projects in a third country market. 
Buckovski voiced confidence about a bilateral agreement on economic co-operation, sealed in Ankara on Tuesday. He said he expects Turkish investments in Macedonia to reach nearly 60m euros by the end of this year. 
Following his arrival in Ankara on Tuesday, Buckovski met with Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who noted that "co-operation between Turkey and Macedonia has been developing and diversifying." 
 At the end of 2004, the trade volume between the two countries equalled nearly 150m euros, which was "not enough at all", Erdogan said at a press conference after his talks with Buckovski. He added that the measures the two leaders agreed on would pave the way for an increase. 
While concurring with Erdogan's expectations, Buckovski also suggested there is a need to review the existing free trade agreement between the two countries to resolve certain problems faced by Turkish and Macedonian businesses. 
Macedonian press reports suggested steps in that direction would likely be taken in April, when a Turkish delegation is expected to visit Skopje, ahead of Erdogan's trip to the country the following month. 
On Tuesday, Erdogan also expressed Ankara's support for Macedonia's NATO accession bid and its commitment to continued political and economic co-operation, including in the fight against terrorism and organised crime. He also reportedly offered Macedonia assistance in the restoration of an Ottoman-era bridge built during the rule of Sultan Mehmed II the Conqueror. 
''Rooted relations based on mutual history and cultural values between Turkey and Macedonia formed the basis of solid friendship between the two countries,'' he said. 
