02/09/2004
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens - 02/09/04
Greek consumers are paying more for goods and services, due to a wave of Olympics-related price hikes. Increases in the cost of food, transportation, tourist packages and private education have either already been announced or are expected shortly. From the beginning of March to the end of May, hotel prices increased by 5 per cent, pharmaceutical drugs by 1.8 per cent, and most consumer goods by 1.6 per cent. 
Although last month's Games are seen as the immediate catalyst, the issue is not new. Rather, it represents a continuation of a long-term trend. International research companies rank Athens as the 17th most expensive city in the world, with some basic services -- a cup of coffee, for example -- costing more than in New York or Sydney. At 261 euros, the average cost of an Athens hotel room is the seventh highest worldwide, after London, Paris, New York, Geneva, Tokyo and Tel Aviv. 
Moreover, Athens ranks among the five costliest cities in relation to local wages. With the minimum wage in Greece at slightly less than 600 euros, many cannot afford to spend 7 euros on a small meal. To address the problem, authorities are imposing price control structures and conducting systematic market inspections, as well as distributing brochures to tourists, listing recommended prices. 
There is a limit to the government's willingness to intervene, as authorities are committed to allowing the market to operate freely, and to policies designed to spur competition. The Greek Competition Committee must be given increased authority, officials say. An overhaul of the country's anti-monopoly regulations is planned, expanding business inspections and seeking to eliminate abuses stemming from interdependence between suppliers and retailers. But it will be some time before such polices are implemented, since the legislative framework is not yet in place. 
Meanwhile, experts at the economy ministry insist that the market should be able to correct itself, as consumers respond to lower buying capacity by limiting their spending. However, Greece is also experiencing slumps in demand due to scarcity of tourists and the unwillingness of foreign enterprises to choose Greece as a base of operations. The resulting lack of job opportunities could squeeze consumers further. 
