20/02/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 20/02/06
Talks opened between representatives of Serbia and the Kosovo Albanians on Monday (20 February) in Vienna, marking the first stage of negotiations between the two sides. The delegations are presenting contrasting proposals for local government reform meant to ensure the rights of Kosovo's minorities. 
According to Reuters, the Kosovo and Serbian sides held separate breakfast meetings with UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari before taking their seats at a horseshoe-shaped table at the 18th-century Palais Daun-Kinsky. Chaired by Ahtisaari's deputy, Albert Rohan, the initial round is expected to continue until Tuesday. 
The participants will be trying to find common ground on the issue of decentralising power and giving local communities -- including the approximately 100,000 Serbs in Kosovo -- the right to manage their own affairs. These talks are seen as a prelude to grappling with the more intractable question of Kosovo's ultimate status. 
Even on decentralisation, however, Belgrade and Pristina are far apart. The Serbian side is arguing for the rights of Kosovo Serbs to form mono-ethnic municipalities with strong ties to each other and to Belgrade -- in effect, creating a type of Serbian enclave within Kosovo. 
The Kosovo side has rejected this idea, saying it amounts to a partition of the province -- something explicitly ruled out by the Contact Group's agreed-on guidelines, which also bar a return to the 1999 status quo and the joining of Kosovo to another country. 
Pristina says it is committed to protecting the rights of Serbs and other minorities within a multiethnic, independent Kosovo. Serbia, however, opposes full independence for Kosovo and wants to retain some form of sovereignty over the province. 
Technically part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been under international administration since 1999. Its Kosovo Albanian majority, amounting to about 90 per cent of the population, strongly favours independence from Belgrade. 
"We are not going to get closer with Serbia but to separate forever from her," delegation chief Lutfi Haziri said before departing for Vienna. 
On Sunday, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen reiterated the importance of adequate protection of minorities in Kosovo. He said the international community has given the Kosovo Albanian majority a clear signal that their aspirations can be realised, while also stressing that minority rights must be guaranteed. 
Decentralisation, he said, will be key to gaining the trust of minority communities. 
