03/04/2008
(AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, BBC, CNA, Cyprus Mail, Zaman - 03/04/08; UN News Centre, Reuters, AFP, DPA - 02/04/08)
A crossing at Nicosia's Ledra Street, a symbol of Cyprus's decades-long division, opened on Thursday (April 3rd), less than two weeks after the leaders of the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities agreed to the move. An 80m stretch of the street lies in the no-man's land separating the city's Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot sectors. 
Cyprus has been split along ethnic lines since 1974, when Turkish troops invaded the island to quash a brief Athens-backed coup aimed at uniting it with Greece. 
 Cypriot President Demetris Christofias and Turkish Cypriot leader Mehmet Ali Talat decided to open the crossing during talks on March 21st. They also agreed to resume re-unification talks within three months. 
 Officials from both sides then started preparations to open the Ledra Street crossing, which only became possible after UN peacekeepers checked the area for unexploded landmines. 
 "We are living a historic day today," Talat's adviser, Osdil Nami, said on Thursday. "We are witnessing one of the obstacles to a solution come down." 
Also attending the ceremony were Greek Cypriot Presidential Commissioner George Iacovou, the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot mayors of Europe's last divided capital, Eleni Mavrou and Jemal Metin Bulutoglulari, as well as UN officials and diplomats. 
"We all know that the opening of Ledra Street does not mean the Cyprus problem is resolved," UN special representative in Cyprus Elizabeth Spehar said. "There is much more hard work to be done. But the opening gives us a glimpse of what is possible when all the elements come together." 
 The crossing is the sixth such point opened since 2003 to allow people to travel between the island's Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot parts. 
While largely a symbolic gesture, Thursday's move is considered an important step towards the revival of re-unification talks between the two communities, which have been stalled since 2004. 
"By opening this street, we hope that the road to a solution to the Cyprus problem will also open," Iacovou told reporters. 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn also welcomed Thursday's move, viewing it as a signal of the two sides' readiness "to put aside the difficulties of the past". 
UN Undersecretary General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe, who arrived in Cyprus on Sunday to assess prospects for possible new negotiations, seemed optimistic Wednesday. 
 "There is a positive tone here in Cyprus at the moment and a probable sense of momentum," he told reporters at a press conference before leaving Nicosia. "I am encouraged and I will pass this on to the (UN) Secretary General," he added. 
