08/02/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi in Pristina and Igor Jovanovic in Belgrade – 08/02/07
A brief delay in the final round of UN-mediated talks on Kosovo's status would be acceptable to the EU, the bloc's foreign policy chief, Javier Solana, said on Wednesday (February 7th) in Pristina. 
"Anything that is reasonable as far as time can be acceptable," he said, adding that the delay could be for a week or so. 
Serbia has asked that the talks, originally due to start in Vienna on February 13th, be postponed for ten days to give the country time to convene a new parliament and form a negotiating team. 
The EU official's visit to Pristina came days after UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari presented his blueprint for Kosovo's future. 
Kosovo's people and leaders have started to write the end of one chapter of their history, Solana said, calling on them to respect their obligations, ensure minority protection and human rights, and show "responsibility, determination and hard work" in carrying out reforms. 
"You are the people who should build a new Kosovo," he said. "This can be realistic only if you are united." 
He confirmed that the EU would continue to work with Kosovo and would be engaged in economic reconstruction, political reform, the building of institutions, and the security sector. 
"Kosovars should believe in the EU," he said. "We will accept our responsibilities." 
Solana next travelled to Belgrade, where he joined the other members of the EU Troika -- Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier -- in calling for the formation of a new, democratic cabinet as soon as possible. 
Describing the Ahtisaari proposal as a good foundation for "honest dialogue that will lead to compromise," they urged Serbia to participate in the next round of negotiations. 
President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica told the EU officials that Belgrade would certainly participate, but again requested a delay of the talks until the new parliament convenes. Tadic and Kostunica also said Serbia would never accept an independent Kosovo. 
During the meeting, Rehn stressed the need for Serbia to fully co-operate with The Hague tribunal. Once this happens, he said, the way would be clear for resumption of talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA). 
Separately Wednesday, British European Affairs Minister Geoffrey Hoon also visited Belgrade and said he believed Ahtisaari would demonstrate flexibility when it came to delaying the Vienna talks. 
Hoon went on to say that Serbia must play a constructive part in relations with The Hague tribunal, though he added that full co-operation did not necessarily include the extradition of a specific individual. Negotiations on Serbia's SAA were halted on May 3rd 2006, due to the failure to capture and hand over General Ratko Mladic, indicted for genocide against Bosniaks in Srebrenica in 1995. 
