15/03/2006
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 15/03/06
Montenegro's government has been revamping the educational system in the republic, introducing a new curriculum that stresses critical thinking skills and active learning, boosting exposure to technology, and adding an extra year of schooling. After a year of implementation, the programme is receiving positive marks from parents. 
A recent survey conducted by the Institute for the School System of Montenegro, in collaboration with the Open Society Institute, found that 76.2 per cent of parents are completely satisfied with the education their children are receiving, while 18 per cent said they are mostly satisfied. Only 1 per cent expressed dissatisfaction with the programme, while 4.6 per cent said they were unable to provide a clear evaluation. 
With regard to the education of six-year-olds, 94.4 per cent evaluated the programme and teaching methods positively. 
Comments from parents generally stressed the benefits of the new system -- in particular, reporting that children now have enough time both for school and play, that they are doing their homework with ease, and are eager to go to school. Parents also praised the idea of having English as one of the elective subjects from the first grade. New textbooks also scored well. 
Respondents also welcomed the extra time children spend at school under the new programme, saying it helps encourage school activities as well as relieve some of the burden of working parents. 
Although response to the new system has been generally favourable, some parents have voiced criticism. The early start to the school day -- 7:30 am -- is deemed unsuitable by some; others said the classes are not well organised enough and the classrooms inadequately equipped. 
A few parents objected to the use of "descriptive marks" in place of the old numerical ones, saying that it is no longer possible to get a clear idea of how their children are doing. Most, however, felt the descriptive marks are appropriate for six-year-olds. 
Likewise, a small number of parents expressed their concern that their "children would remain illiterate" or that "they should have more homework". Two survey respondents, in particular, were very critical of the new programme, with one complaining that "children did not develop habits related to school obligations, that they were given too much freedom and were viewing school as some game". 
Parents critical of the system say they want their children to have more homework, as well as more school trips and organised physical education classes. 
According to survey co-ordinators Andja Backovic, Vesna Vucurovic and Zoran Lalovic, these concerns could be addressed by fostering better communication and co-operation between parents and schools. 
The reforms, modeled in part on educational systems in other countries around Europe, reflect a basic change in educational philosophy, moving away from the rote learning favoured in the past. The programme is being financially supported by donations from foreign governments, international institutions such as UNICEF, the Montenegro Open Society Institute, the government of Finland and others. A substantial contribution came from a World Bank grant. 
