12/05/2010
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 12/05/10
Three weeks after NATO conditionally invited Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) to join the Membership Action Plan (MAP), the country's politicians are showing no indication they will meet a key requirement. 
NATO members' foreign ministers authorised the Alliance to accept BiH's first Annual National Programme, scheduled for September, but only if all immovable defence properties are registered as BiH state property, for use by the country's defence ministry. 
The properties, totalling 69 sites, include military barracks, training and shooting ranges, a dozen military storage depots, a radio communications network and several radar facilities and airfields. 
Bosnian Serb leaders say BiH's defence ministry can use all the properties it needs, but the country's two entities -- Republika Srpska (RS) and the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) -- should remain the respective owners. 
Despite calls by international community representatives, RS has refused to yield. Many speculate that the entity's leaders plan to sell some of the properties to potential investors. 
High Representative Valentin Inzko met with BiH Prime Minister Nikola Spiric two weeks ago in a bid to come up with a solution. Resolving the issue is also a prerequisite for closing the Office of the High Representative. 
After the Yugoslav Peoples Army left the country in 1992, much of its equipment ended up in the hands of local armed forces and was used in the ensuing 1992-1995 conflict. The 1995 Dayton Peace Accord legalised the country's two-entity structure, and the property was divided between the RS and FBiH armies. 
Defence reform in 2006 led to both armies being disbanded in favour of a unified Armed Forces of BiH. 
BiH Defence Minister Selmo Cikotic is expressing cautious optimism that a final agreement on military properties can be reached before September. He called it "an important test of our political authorities to show that they are really able to achieve a consensus." 
Banja Luka-based political analyst Tanja Topic, however, is sceptical that a deal could be in place before the next elections, scheduled for October. Topic told SETimes that when NATO issued its MAP invitation, RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik reminded everyone of the entity's stance regarding the defence properties. 
However, in a statement to the local press, Dodik also said the issue could be solved through a separate agreement that would cover all defence properties. That is, only those properties actually needed for defence purposes would be under ownership of the BiH defence ministry. 
The rest, he said, would belong to the "the entities, local communities and schools". 
Milos Solaja, director of the Centre for International Relations in Banja Luka, told SETimes that the odds for a deal will improve if politicians in Sarajevo, not Banja Luka, in effect blink first. 
"They want NATO membership much more then Republika Srpska officials do, and they will be keener to soften their position. Public support for NATO is rather small in [RS] and its officials do not feel that they have an obligation to compromise," said Solaja. 
