31/03/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 31/03/05
The relocation of Belgrade's central railway station, situated on the bank of the Sava River, is the largest infrastructure project currently under way in the Serbian capital. The new site, situated at a highway intersection, has been under construction for 30 years now. However, authorities have recently unveiled plans to complete the task and transform the riverbank into Belgrade's business centre. 
The project, dubbed "Little Manhattan", is worth about 3.85 billion euros, making it Serbia's largest investment ever. Several complexes, including deluxe hotels, are planned for an area covering 110 hectares of land. For the first time, Belgraders would be able to enjoy a view of the water from downtown. Currently, industrial sites hide the confluence of the Danube and Sava rivers, dividing Old and New Belgrade. 
"Little Manhattan" is just one of several initiatives city officials are undertaking in a bid to give a new look to the capital. Another is the construction of a new bridge over the Sava. Belgrade Mayor Nenad Bogdanovic recently signed a pre-contract with the EBRD on financing the 110m-euro project, which is meant to significantly improve the capital's traffic infrastructure. EBRD Deputy Director Henry Russell has said his organisation is ready to invest between 50m and 75m euros; the rest would come from city coffers. According to Bogdanovic, the contract should be signed by the end of this year, with construction beginning in 2006. 
Also under way is the revamping of the city's urban rail system -- the central factor in any consideration of Belgrade's traffic situation. Ninety-five per cent of the existing system, Beovoz, is a classic railway connecting the downtown with suburbs, but it also has a modern underground station that would become the central subway station under the project. The Spanish firm Ineco and its local partner Yuginus have produced a sustainability and feasibility study on a light rail transit system -- part underground, part classical railway -- and a general project for the first phase of construction. 
If approved, the project could be launched by the end of 2005. The first line would be operational in 2010. The investment necessary to build the first line has been estimated at 330m euros. Authorities have announced financial arrangements to cover the project cost with banks and other potential investors. 
