28/03/2005
(The Scotsman - 28/03/05; VOA, Kosovareport, Radio B92, Tanjug - 27/03/05; UN News Centre, UNMIK Local Media Monitoring - 25/03/05)
UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen arrived on a two-day visit to Belgrade on Sunday (27 March) for talks with top officials. On Sunday, he met Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, prior to talks Monday with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, President Boris Tadic and the head of Serbia's Kosovo co-ordination centre, Nebojsa Covic. 
UNMIK officials said the visit was a regular one aimed at continuing dialogue with Belgrade and briefing the Serbia-Montenegro leadership on developments in Kosovo. It comes ahead of an international review, expected in June, of progress made in implementing UN-set standards in the province. 
 A positive assessment is a precondition for the launch of talks later in the year to determine the province's final status. The standards cover eight areas, including rule of law, democratic institutions, human and minority rights and the economy. 
During his meeting with Jessen-Petersen, Draskovic said implementation of the standards should include a European level of protection for Serbs and other minorities, return of refugees, decentralisation of authority, and the rebuilding of houses, churches and monasteries destroyed during ethnic clashes last year. 
He also called for a solution based on the formula "more than autonomy, less than independence". It would leave Serbia-Montenegro's existing borders with Albania and Macedonia unchanged. 
Serbia wants to participate in any future negotiations on the province's status on an equal footing with the Kosovo Albanians, who make up about 90 per cent of the province's population of nearly two million people. 
Last week, Jessen-Petersen's principal deputy, Larry Rossin, told the Kosovo daily Koha Ditore that the international community is united on the position that a return to the pre-1999 situation is out of the question. Neither is the partition of Kosovo considered an acceptable option for final status, he said. 
Meanwhile, a Kosovo Albanian government official told The Scotsman daily that the province is on track to meet most of the targets set by the international community by the time of the review. 
"By June of this year we're convinced that we'll have 90 per cent of the priority standards completed," said Avni Arifi, political adviser to Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi. "By fulfilling standards we're convincing the international community that we're a functioning multiethnic government." 
