27/01/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 27/01/12
Ivica Dacic plays two roles, serving in the cabinet as minister of internal affairs and deputy prime minister, as well as leading the Socialist Party of Serbia in the coalition government. 
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, he acknowledges his dual roles are a challenge, since "everything that happens in security can have [political] consequences, including arresting war crimes suspects." His party, after all, was once headed by Slobodan Milosevic. 
Dacic proudly notes that public approval ratings of his ministry are sharply higher than they were when his mandate began, and directors of both Interpol and Europol attended celebrations marking two centuries of Serbian police. 
Regarding Kosovo, Dacic sees two different issues: resolving everyday quality of life matters and the "permanent solution", which he says "must be fair: taking into account the interests of all parties". The best solution, he says, may involve a correction of the administrative line between central Serbia and Kosovo. Washington, he notes "has always said that we should respect the reality on the ground, and the reality on the ground today tells us there are two Kosovos: Serbian and Albanian". 
As for EU integration, Dacic says "The task for all of us is to find a compromise and balance ... Serbia needs to enter the EU, in spite of all obstacles." But there are terms Serbia cannot accept: "implicit recognition of Kosovo, as well as all attempts to force Kosovo Serbs into Kosovo institutions", says Dacic. 
He rejects suggestions that Serbia is spending more time courting co-operation with Russian agencies than with those of the US. While acknowledging historically close ties with Moscow, he tells SETimes, "I think it is very important for Serbia to set some goals and to improve its relations with the US, with Germany and with other EU countries, preserving good relations with Russia. If someone says that it is impossible, then one should explain how does Germany have excellent relations with both Russia and the US?" 
He adds, "I would, personally, like to build partnership relations with the US because they are a key factor for resolving the Kosovo issue." 
As for NATO membership, "The majority of citizens are still against joining NATO and that is why parliament has issued the Declaration of Military Neutrality. But that does not mean that Serbia should not build and develop relations with NATO, through various programmes, such as the Partnership for Peace." 
Serbian police, says Dacic, have been forging ties with other departments in the region, especially neighbouring Croatia. He adds, "We have good co-operation with Macedonia, Montenegro, Bosnia, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, and Slovenia." 
Dacic has visited Tirana twice and says "We have great co-operation with Albania, [although] there has been some opposition regarding this co-operation in our parliament and in Albania's." 
Ties with Kosovo police are a completely different matter. "We do not have co-operation because Serbia does not recognise Kosovo as an independent state. Therefore, we have signed agreements with UNMIK and EULEX and we co-operate with the Kosovo police through these agreements." 
Dacic is enthusiastic about strengthening ties with US crime-fighting agencies. "We have fantastic co-operation with the FBI and DEA (Drug Enforcement Administration), and with other American security structures. The fight against crime doesn't exist without co-operation." He says he has signed more than 25 agreements with countries in Latin America, the EU, Russia and China. The latest, he says, involves Australia. 
In terms of freedom of movement, Dacic tells SETimes "We have abolished visas with Albania. The passports at border crossings with Macedonia have been canceled at my initiative and I proposed the same for Albania and Croatia." 
