26/04/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 26/04/06
Earlier this month, the prime minsters of eight Balkan countries gathered in Bucharest to sign a joint declaration on expanding the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), paving the way for a free trade zone in the region. With talks set to kick off in late May, the proposal could go into effect by early next year. 
Expanding CEFTA was a proposal floated by Croatia as an alternative to the EU's original idea of creating a so-called "Balkan Free Trade Zone". Brussels' plan came under fierce criticism in Croatia, with many complaining that it was reminiscent of the former Yugoslavia and would slow Croatia's road to EU accession by lumping it together with other states that are not as far along in the process. 
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader sought to defuse the most strident criticism, while at the same time suggesting the CEFTA expansion as an alternative. Under the agreement reached this month, CEFTA will grow to include all the Western Balkan nations, plus Moldova. Current members Bulgaria and Romania will withdraw after they gain EU membership, expected in 2007. 
To facilitate the expansion, some of the rules governing CEFTA are being relaxed, including the requirements for WTO membership and the need for members to already have institutionalised relations with the EU. Although members no longer need to be formal candidates for EU accession, the new entrants into the agreement -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Moldova and Serbia-Montenegro -- seek eventual membership. 
Since 2001, nations in the region have worked out some 31 separate trade agreements, but many experts say implementation has been haphazard. The CEFTA expansion is meant to replace this labyrinth of agreements and will be easier to implement. 
In addition, CEFTA will be modernised through the addition of new provisions for harmonising rules and regulations, improving dispute settlement, trade in services and the protection of intellectual property. 
Trade within the region increased 33 per cent between 2001, when it totaled 2.7 billion euros, and 2004, when it reached 3.5 billion euros, according to European Commission figures. At the same time, trade with the rest of the world grew by 21 per cent -- from 30.2 billion euros in 2001 to 36.4 billion euros in 2004. 
Trade between the SEE countries and the EU increased from 52 billion euros in 2001 to 79.8 billion euros in 2005, a rate of 53 per cent. 
