01/05/2006
By Gelu Trandafir and Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 01/05/06
"Free trade spaghetti" is how EU Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson describes the complicated network of bilateral agreements -- 31 in all, among eight different countries -- governing trade links in the Balkans. That's set to change, now that regional leaders have signed onto a plan to expand and modernise the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA). 
Eight prime ministers, together with representatives of UNMIK, gathered in Bucharest in early April to launch negotiations on what EU officials describe as an "apprenticeship" for membership in the bloc -- a goal shared by countries across the region. 
Regional integration reinforces the push towards EU accession, Mandelson told the Romanian daily Cotidianul "Closer trading links in this part of Europe are a preparation for the realities of life in the EU and are a direct link to eventual membership," he said. 
Similarly, EU Enlargement Commisioner Olli Rehn describes the expanded CEFTA as an economic "training ground" for EU membership. "In no way does it replace the European perspective, but rather complements it by preparing the countries for closer economic integration with the EU", Rehn said. 
Such comments are in part intended to defuse reluctance among some Balkan countries, particularly Croatia, which already is in membership negotiations with Brussels and has voiced concerns that a regional trade pact would slow its path. The idea of expanding CEFTA was floated by Zagreb as an alternative to an earlier proposal from Brussels which struck some in the region as overly reminiscent of the former Yugoslavia. 
According to Rehn, SEE countries have common challenges which can be best addressed through regional co-operation. "You have to work together in order to overcome the challenges of globalisation, unemployment, organised crime in the same manner as the EU's member states," he told the April summit, which was hosted by Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu and the Special Co-ordinator of the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, Erhard Busek. 
Brussels has made it clear that regional co-operation is a key element of its policy for the region, in part because of its importance for political stability and economic development. The summit, according to EU officials, sent a strong message to foreign investors, demonstrating that the Balkan countries are able to work together to address an important issue. When the EU's free trade proposal turned out to be problematic, the process didn't simply collapse. Rather, the SEE states themselves were able to put forward -- and agree on -- an alternative. 
