05/07/2004
(Novinar, Novinite - 05/07/04; Reuters, BTA, Novinite, Dnevnik, Standartnews, Pari, bTV, Vsekiden.com - 04/07/04; BBC - 03/07/04)
Bulgaria will launch two tenders by the end of this month to select a contractor and a financial advisor for the construction of a nuclear power plant at Belene, Bulgarian Energy Minister Milko Kovachev said Sunday (4 July). Shedding more light on the country's plans for the project, the official also announced that a new nuclear company would be set up in early 2005.
At a news conference in Sofia, Kovachev said agreement on how to proceed had been reached during a closed government meeting held on 24 June. In May, the government decided to revive the Belene project to ensure the country's leading position in the Balkan electricity market following the closure of four reactors at the Kozloduy nuclear power plant.
Bulgaria started building a second nuclear power plant at Belene, about 250km northeast of Sofia, in the 1980s. After spending about 800m euros, it froze the project in the early 1990s due to lack of funds. The plant's power utilities have been supplied, but are not yet installed.
Under EU pressure, Bulgaria shut down the two oldest of Kozloduy's six units in 2002 and has pledged to close two more of the Soviet-era reactors before it joins the Union in January 2007.
Two more sophisticated 1,000MgW units at Kozloduy will be incorporated into the new company. Reuters quoted Kovachev as saying the company would apply for a loan of up to 350m euros from the EU's Euroatom fund and from credit export agencies of the contracted consortium for the plant.
The state will keep between 51 per cent and 80 per cent of the shares of the company, but shares will also be offered to local companies and municipalities, emulating an approach used in Finland.
Bulgaria will invite the three multinational consortiums that have expressed interest in the project to submit their final bids by late autumn.
The economy, finance and energy ministers, together with experts from the National Electricity Company, will shortlist the technologies and contractors by the end of this year, before the contracts are signed in early 2005, Kovachev said.
He cited nuclear safety and the price of Belene-generated electricity as the key criteria in the selection process. The price, according to government projections, should be in the range of 3 to 4 euro cents per kilowatt hour.
The overall cost of the project is likely to exceed 1.6 billion euros. Of that amount, half would be spent by 2010, when the first of the new plant's 1400MgW to 2000MgW reactors is expected to become operational. Bulgaria will provide state guarantees for 50 per cent of the cost of the project.
According to Kovachev, Bulgaria currently covers over 50 per cent of the energy deficit in the Balkans.
