06/10/2004
(EUobserver, Novinite - 06/10/04; AFP, FT, BBC, EUpolitix, RFE/RL, Mediafax, Croatian Information Centre - 05/10/04) 
European Commission (EC) reports released Wednesday (6 October) give the green light to Bulgaria and Romania's EU entry in 2007. Under a proposed "safeguard clause", however, the two countries' membership could be delayed by a year if they falter in their reform efforts. 
"Bulgaria and Romania fulfil the political criteria," read widely leaked copies of the commission's annual reports on the candidate countries' progress towards accession. "They will be ready for accession on 1 January 2007." 
Sluggish reform progress following the fall of communism in Bulgaria and Romania in 1989 prevented the two Balkan countries' from joining the Union in May, when 10 Central and East European nations came aboard in the bloc's largest-ever expansion. 
Bulgaria completed its membership talks with Brussels in June, but the EC is pressing the country to make further efforts to reform its judiciary and public administration. According to the commission, corruption remains a major issue in Bulgaria partly because the judiciary is too weak to press cases against senior officials, politicians and businessmen. 
This year's report on Romania, which has yet to complete the environment, competition and justice and home affairs negotiations chapters, declares the country a "functioning market economy" -- a major economic requirement a country must meet before joining the 25-nation bloc. 
But Romania is criticised for the level of corruption in the country, which "remains a serious and widespread problem which affects almost all aspects of society," according to an AFP story on the EC report. 
Voicing concern over press freedom in Romania, the report cites a rise in the number of serious physical attacks against investigative journalists. It also says Romania "remains a country of origin, transit and destination for victims of trafficking in human beings." 
Seeking to ensure that both countries will meet their reform commitments before entering the Union, the EC reports recommend the inclusion of a "safeguard clause" in their accession treaties, likely signed in early 2005. The mechanism would allow Brussels to postpone Bulgaria and Romania's accession until 2008. 
Incoming Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Tuesday that inclusion of the clause was not "just for fun" and Brussels would not hesitate to apply it. 
Croatia, which became an official EU candidate in June, was hoping to join the EU in 2007, together with Bulgaria and Romania. However, Zagreb's hopes took a blow Wednesday, as the EC report on the country's progress towards accession stopped short of recommending a start date for membership talks. 
Zagreb was told that if it wants to stay on track for starting negotiations, it should continue to improve its democratic and human rights standards. 
Brussels has already made it clear that full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal is a key condition on the path to the EU. Other requirements include advancing the refugee returns process and judicial reform. 
