26/04/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 26/04/10
Remittances -- hard-earned money sent home by emigres abroad -- have played a key role in Kosovo's economic, social and political development. Together with donor assistance and domestic savings, remittances sent from Germany, France, Switzerland and other countries where Albanians work and reside have provided nearly half of Kosovo's domestic revenue in recent years. 
More than half a million Kosovars work in Western countries and send money home. A study last year by the Statistical Office of Kosovo and the World Bank found that "migration and remittances have been effective ways for households to protect themselves from falling into poverty". 
In the wake of the 1999 conflict in Kosovo, the World Bank estimates nearly 80% of Albanians in Kosovo receive monthly remittances between 185 and 375 euros. However, the global recession is severely impacting the amount of money Kosovo Albanians abroad are now sending home. 
Agron and Aferdita Limani, a middle-aged couple with three children -- Ermal, 11, Fortesa, 6, and Luani, 4 -- are a case in point. For this rural family of five living in Prizen, every day is a struggle to survive. The family resides in the village of Krusha e Vogel, an area that suffered greatly during the 1999 conflict. 
 Agron, 41, is an engineer by training and his 38-year-old wife is a nurse. Neither is currently employed. 
Agron worked as a teacher before landing an engineering job with a private company, but he became jobless in 2006 when the business went bankrupt. 
The family survives on what Argon's younger brother -- 39-year-old Bekim Limani -- who has worked in Germany since 1994, sends home. 
The money Bekim sent to Kosovo each month -- most recently from a job with a landscape company in Dortmund -- made all the difference in the life of the Limanis. 
"I've been jobless since 2006, but Bekim would compensate and make up for that because he had a permanent job," Agron told SETimes. 
Not only did Bekim meet his own needs, said Agron, "but to a great extent, the needs of my family as well." 
This has not been the case since the recession that started in 2008 began hitting countries around Europe, severely affecting the amount Bekim is able to send home. Others, however, have stopped sending money altogether. 
"My brother's income was greatly reduced because the company he worked for could no longer give him regular work," said Agron. "Before the recession we would get 250 euros each month from Bekim. Now he sends 100 euros a month." 
Where the family once managed to survive on 350 euros a month -- an accomplishment for a family of five -- they are now living on about 200 euros a month. 
"The financial crisis that swept the world is reflected among us in Kosovo as well," said Agron. 
Due to the decrease in monthly income, the family has been forced to turn to other sources for provisions. Aferdita said that because they live in a village, they are able to grow some of the food that the family depends on to live. 
"The best part is the vegetables such as peppers, tomatoes, potatoes, onions and beans," she said. "I prepare the bread at home myself with flour from our crops." 
Money, she said, goes for things they can't grow or otherwise provide, such as milk, yogurt, macaroni, cooking oil, sugar and salt. 
The food she cooks is cheap to prepare and heavy on beans, potatoes, rice, cabbage and other fillers. 
"The preparation takes a lot of time," said Aferdita, explaining the unseen burdens of making do on a shoestring, such as having less time to help the children with their homework. 
The situation is certain to get worse in the near future. On April 15th, German Interior Minister Thomas de Maiziere said that Germany plans to return 14,000 Kosovars to their country. Currently, there are 55,000 Kosovo citizens living and working in Germany. 
However, de Maiziere said, the move will take place slowly, with 2,500 citizens returning home annually. 
Although Agron does not know what affect this news will have on his brother, "it could always get worse," he says. 
