28/05/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 28/05/09
Delegates of the Muslim Party of Democratic Action (SDA) elected incumbent president Sulejman Tihic to another four-year term at the party congress Tuesday (May 26th). 
Tihic, 57, took over as SDA leader in 2001, succeeding President Alija Izetbegovic. 
 "We have to continue the process of negotiations, make compromises and … staff changes within the party," Tihic said after the elections, emphasising his efforts to preserve unity within the SDA. 
Tihic won 425 out of 766 delegates' votes, while the other contenders -- Bakir Izetbegovic and Adnan Terzic -- won 301 and 19 votes, respectively. Delegates also elected a deputy president, five vice-presidents, and new board members. 
The media hailed these SDA elections as highly democratic, for having three candidates in the running instead of one. Recently, the opposition Social Democratic Party headed by Zlatko Lagumdzija, and the ethnic Serb Union of Independent Social Democrats, headed by Milorad Dodik, had only one contender in their elections. 
Fadil Mandal, a political columnist with Sarajevo's leading daily Dnevni Avaz, commented that "all three [SDA] candidates, through their campaigns, in their fierce TV duels and demonstrated lobbying capacity, have taught other political parties a real lesson, [in conducting democratic elections]." 
Tihic has been highly criticised by some party members for making excessive concessions in the 2008 Prud Agreement, which focuses on the succession of state property and constitutional changes, and was signed by BiH's Serb and Croat leaders. 
SDA Vice-President Bakir Izetbegovic accused Tihic of making Prud Agreement concessions single-handedly, without consulting other SDA members. 
Adnan Terzic -- an SDA vice-president and former head of the BiH government from 2002 to 2007 -- avoided the accusations against Tihic. 
The SDA emerged as the Bosniak Muslims' leading party during the country's first multi-party democratic elections in 1990. Led by Alija Izetbegovic, the SDA reached a level of paramount importance during the 1992-95 conflict. 
