19/01/2009
(Reuters, AFP, International Herald Tribune, Euobserver, EurActic, Euronews, BBC, Kyiv Post - 19/01/09; APFT, Dnevnik, Mediapool - 18/01/09)
Russia and Ukraine are expected to sign an agreement in Moscow on Monday (January 19th) that should enable the resumption of Russian natural gas deliveries to Europe after 12 days of severe supply disruptions occasioned by a payment dispute. 
Officials announced the deal Sunday after ten hours of talks in Moscow between Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and his Ukrainian counterpart, Yulia Tymoshenko. Gazprom of Russia and Naftogaz of Ukraine are to sign it after their experts finalise contract details. 
"Once all the documents on gas transit and gas purchases have been signed, gas transit to Europe will be fully restored," Tymoshenko promised on Russian TV. 
Talks on a new contract collapsed on December 31st after the two sides failed to agree on the size of Ukraine's unpaid debts and Russia's demands for a higher price in 2009. Ukraine rejected Moscow's proposed 2009 price of 188 euros per 1,000 cubic metres of gas, proposing 151 euros per 1,000 cubic metres if Moscow would pay higher transit fees for sending gas to Europe via Ukraine. Gazprom said that, having rejected its offer, Ukraine should then start paying a European-level rate of around 339 euros immediately. 
Russia halted gas shipments to Ukraine on January 1st. Accusing Kiev of "stealing" gas intended for European customers, it then cut off all deliveries to Eastern Europe on January 7th amid bitter cold temperatures. 
The move sparked sharp criticism of both countries from the EU and the United States. More than 20 nations have suffered a disruption in gas supplies. 
A Kremlin source told reporters that, under Sunday's deal, the new price to be paid by Ukraine will depend on the formula for European consumers, which is pegged to oil prices with a six-month delay. Russia also agreed to grant Ukraine a 20% discount this year if the transit fee charged by Kiev equals that applied in 2008. 
"From January 1st 2010, the European price formula will be applied without a discount," the unnamed official said. 
Sunday's agreement met a cautious reception in Europe, where the "gas war" undermined Russia and Ukraine's reputations as reliable partners. Czech officials, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency, and the European Commission cited previous short-lived breakthroughs. 
 "We remain realistic," Czech Industry Minister Martin Riman said on behalf of the 27-nation bloc. "The only thing that counts for the EU is the resumption of gas supplies." 
EU energy officials are meeting in Brussels on Monday to assess the economic damage. 
Bulgaria, one of the countries worst hit by the crisis, says its companies suffered direct losses of about 75m euros, while the indirect ones were much higher. Demonstrators in Sofia on Sunday demanded the reopening of two Soviet-era nuclear reactors in their country. They were closed in agreement with EU membership preconditions. Brussels opposes any reopening. 
