25/02/2010
By Erol Izmirli for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 25/02/10
In the wake of charges against members of the military for alleged plans to topple the government, Turkey's president and prime minister met with army Chief of General Staff Ilker Basbug on Thursday (February 25th) to discuss the state of the nation. 
The "Sledgehammer" investigation, which led to the detention of around 50 military personnel on Monday, was the focus of the talks. 
Observers in Turkey, where the army has toppled a sitting government four times since 1960, described the meeting as unprecedented. "It's a first in Turkish history," wrote veteran newspaper columnist Fikret Bila. 
In a statement issued afterwards, President Abdullah Gul said the crisis over the alleged coup plot must be resolved within the framework of the constitution. 
 On Wednesday, an Istanbul court brought formal charges against seven military officers allegedly involved in the conspiracy. Another 13, including five admirals and three generals, were indicted on Thursday, bringing the total number to 20. 
The indictees are all part of the larger group detained on Monday and interrogated by prosecutors the following day. Among the suspects are former air force chief Ibrahim Firtina, former navy chief Ozden Ornek, former army commanders Ergin Saygun and Cetin Dogan and dozens of high-ranking officers. 
 The military's so-called Sledgehammer Operation against the Justice and Development Party (AKP) was reportedly drawn up in 2003. According to the daily Taraf, which first revealed the plot, the military planned to cause dramatic unrest in the country in order to remove the AKP from power. 
Those measures allegedly included bombing two major mosques in Istanbul, an assault on a military museum and raising the tensions with Greece by initiating fights with Greek fighter planes over the Aegean Sea. Allegations also include an idea to shoot down a Turkish plane and blaming it on Greece. 
 In the absence of further information from the military, Ankara was rife with rumours that all four-star generals were considering resigning, in reaction to the government's move. 
 In a separate investigation called Ergenekon, which started in 2007, a number of other high-ranking officers were arrested on similar charges. The case is still being investigated by a special court in Istanbul. 
The popular AKP government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has been elected twice. 
