29/10/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 29/10/08
The UN mission in Kosovo has denied that Andrew Ladley, the UN's envoy in talks between Belgrade and Pristina, is working on a proposal for the "administrative division" of Kosovo. 
In a statement Tuesday (October 28th), UNMIK spokesman Alexander Ivanko said the envoy had not put forward any proposals of his own. His task, Ivanko said, was simply to foster communication on several issues: courts, police, customs, transport, infrastructure and protection of cultural and religious heritage. 
"We are just consulting with [Belgrade and Pristina] and trying to help dialogue," Ivanko said. 
Media reports earlier in the week said Ladley had floated the idea of administrative division as a step towards winning Belgrade's acceptance of the EU police and judicial mission, EULEX, which is taking over from UNMIK. Kosovo representatives reportedly walked out of a meeting with Ladley on Friday. 
 Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and President Fatmir Sejdiu both insist that EULEX should be deployed across Kosovo's entire territory, without preconditions. On Tuesday, meanwhile, Mitrovica Mayor Bajram Rexhepi called on UNMIK to show more determination in shutting down Serb parallel structures in the city, which remains divided along ethnic lines. 
"These structures are criminal groups that are supported by Serbia's ministry of the interior, which is led by one of [Slobodan] Milosevic's closest partners," Rexhepi said. 
 Meanwhile, a Kosovo-based think tank presented its blueprint -- the so-called "Ahtisaari Plus" plan -- for resolving the situation in Serb-dominated northern Kosovo. International institutions must take swift action if they want to prevent a partition, the Kosovar Institute for Policy Research and Development (KIPRED) warned. 
KIPRED's proposal envisions an economic package for the north, including a free economic zone and a special investment area for both northern Mitrovica and southern Mitrovica, as well as for Zvecan. 
Prior to that, EULEX would deploy in the north and ensure the rule of law. Dismantling Serb parallel structures and establishing a police presence would follow. According to the think tank, all this must be done by March or April 2009 to prevent the situation from deteriorating. 
Slow deployment is hampering the EU mission's credibility, KIPRED warned. "There is a risk that EULEX might become a useless mission for both Albanians and Serbs even before it becomes fully operational," it said, adding that the handover of responsibilities from UNMIK is so far not being carried through on the ground. 
On Sunday, KFOR deployed 650 troops from Austria and Germany to northern Kosovo. Last week, meanwhile, the United States and the EU signed an agreement providing for American participation in EULEX -- the first time the United States has contributed in such a way to a EU operation. 
