21/07/2005
(Sofia News Agency - 20/07/05; Sofia News Agency, BNN, Mediapool, DPA, Bulgarian Government Web Site - 12/07/05; The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik, Sofia News Agency - 11/07/05)
The UN will help Bulgaria cope with the damage caused by severe flooding over the past two months, Bulgarian Civil Defence authorities confirmed Wednesday (20 July), following a meeting with UN representatives. 
The aid will include goods, blankets and medicines, the officials said. The news comes a day after the EU announced it is ready to allot additional funds to Bulgaria and neighbouring Romania for coping with the natural disaster. 
Twenty people have been killed, and tens of thousands of homes destroyed, in the two countries as a result of the flooding, caused by unprecedented torrential rains. About two million people, nearly a quarter of Bulgaria's 7.5 million population, have been affected. Last week, outgoing Finance Minister Milen Velchev asked the EU to provide 75m euros in financial aid to help the country cover the damage. 
Urging the European Commission (EC) to launch procedures to extend funding from the EU Solidarity Fund (EUSF), Velchev detailed the losses incurred. A total of 6,300 buildings across the country have been flooded. In addition, the deluge has damaged 52 bridges, 420 streets and 35km of railroads. Overall losses total an estimated 75m euros, not including agricultural crop damages, which have yet to be assessed. 
The EUSF was created under a proposal from the EC following the devastating floods that hit Central Europe in August 2002. The goal was to organise European solidarity in response to any major natural disasters, including floods. 
All member states and countries negotiating accession can request aid from the EUSF, which is not designed to cover private losses or to meet all the costs linked to natural disasters. According to the EU, it is rather designed to provide fast, effective and flexible emergency financial aid to provide temporary accommodation or the provisional repair of vital infrastructure, permitting the resumption of everyday life. 
On Tuesday, the EU said it was ready to allot aid both through the EUSF and through the PHARE 2004 and 2005 programmes. 
Older Bulgarians in the areas worst affected by the floods said they remember no heavier rainfalls in the past 50 years. In many regions, the rains triggered landslides. In some rural areas, the flood damage took its toll on crops and livestock. 
The opposition right wing Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) has urged the government to submit a report to parliament, specifying the measures it has taken in response to the floods, as well as the resources spent so far for relief operations. According to UDF deputy chairman Nikolay Mladenov, the party would back any decision for the reallocation of budgetary resources to cover damage caused by the disaster. 
