07/08/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 07/08/06
Twenty new members from Kosovo's minority communities joined the Kosovo Protection Corps last week, increasing minority representation to 215. The recruits include three Serbs, seven Bosniaks, two Croats, three Turks, two Ashkali, one Kosovo Egyptian and one Roma. 
"Most of you are young and this is necessary for KPC. A part of my work is the transformation and professionalism, and that we can achieve with the youth. Your generation is the key to success," said KPC Co-ordinator General Chris Steirn. He also welcomed the growing number of female recruits. 
Increasing the number of minorities in the KPC is required under the standards that the UN has set for the province. According to the UN criteria, minorities should make up no less than 10 per cent of the force. 
Meeting that goal, however, has been a challenge. According to one of the new Serb members, her decision to join wasn't welcomed by everyone. 
"But we made a decision and it's ours, not our neighbour's," said Ivana Nedeljkovic. 
Another recruit, Basri Tepeku, said he joined the KPC not only to serve the province's institutions, but also his Roma community. 
"We have a wish together to be soldiers. There are no differences here," he added. 
Nermina Muratagic, a Bosnian recruit, said he aims to work "for the KPC, for my people, and my place. We have been welcomed here by the KPC members". 
"This is a big day for me, for my colleagues and friends who are part of the KPC," said another new member, Naser Islami. "I believe that together, my colleagues will show that KPC has a good future and will be Kosovo's military. With our work and commitment, we will show that we merit our participation in KPC." 
According to the latest recommendations of the International Crisis Group, Kosovo should have a 3,000-strong military force after the status settlement. In Pristina, building such a force is seen as significant to Kosovo's long-term prospects for joining international institutions and military structures. 
