10/12/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 10/12/07
Turkey has stepped up plans to build the country's first nuclear power plant, with parliament's approval of a key law that establishes the legal framework for the nuclear power industry. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's administration sees nuclear energy as essential to meeting the surge in demand for energy. However, opposition politicians and environmental groups say the move is a step in the wrong direction. 
 Initially, the government hopes to build an 1,800mw power plant at the Black Sea port of Sinop. The facility would come online in 2014. At one point, there was talk of three nuclear plants with a total capacity of 5,000mw, but the plans have been scaled back. 
Turkey lacks significant domestic energy resources, but its growing economy has made the country a major energy consumer. It is highly dependent on Russian and Iranian gas. In 2006, Turkey contracted to import about 850 billion cubic feet of natural gas from Russia -- 67% of total Turkish natural gas imports. 
The Turkish Energy Ministry, which is authorised under the newly-approved law to run and finalize tenders for the construction of nuclear power plants, is expected to set the requirements soon and announce the tender in the coming months. 
US-based firm General Electric has already expressed interest in participating in Turkey's nuclear power programme. The company says it is capable of meeting all the requirements, but stresses that two factors must be taken into account -- the need to win over the public, given significant opposition, and a lack of engineering skills in the nuclear sector. 
Turkey considers joining GNEP 
Turkish Energy Minister Hilmi Guler met with his American counterpart Samuel W. Bodman in Istanbul last month, and hinted that the United States could co-operate closely with Turkey in developing the country's first nuclear plants. 
The two held a bilateral meeting before the November 18th opening ceremony of the Turkey-Greece gas pipeline -- the first to provide Europe with non-Russian oil. 
Bodman called on Turkey to participate in the Global Nuclear Energy Partnership (GNEP), a US-sponsored international framework for facilitating the worldwide expansion of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in a safe and secure manner. 
The GNEP aims at creating reliable fuel services that will provide a viable and economic alternative to the spread of sensitive nuclear technologies. The partnership seeks to take advantage of the best available fuel cycle approaches to recycle spent nuclear fuel and to reduce the amount of waste and tap its unused energy. 
Turkey has attended the second GNEP ministerial in Vienna as an observer, and Guler told reporters that his government was considering becoming a member of the partnership. 
Anti-nuclear groups want alternative sources  
Turkish environmentalist groups have protested the new nuclear law, gathering recently on Istanbul's Besiktas Avenue to rally against the government's plans. "I feel lucky for not having a power station in Turkey so far," Professor Orhan Kural of Istanbul Technical University said. As a country located in seismically active zones, Turkey is a risky place to build nuclear plants, he said. 
 "At the same time, we do not have enough uranium sources, which would mean that nuclear energy will bring another kind of energy dependency," he said. 
A deputy from the main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP), Cetin Soysal, also joined the protestors and said Turkey should focus on alternative energy sources, rather than nuclear energy, which he said is cheaper and would bring more employment opportunities. 
In the past 30 years, Turkey has made several attempts to launch a nuclear programme, but all failed due to opposition from environmental and anti-nuclear groups, difficulties in attracting sufficient financing and legal problems. 
However, political conditions have changed in Turkey. With the Justice and Development Party having received a strong second mandate, the government is the most stable in years, and the Erdogan administration is in a strong position to push through its agenda. At the same time, energy issues are becoming more urgent, as countries worldwide struggle to ensure that future demands can be met. It remains to be seen whether the government's initiative will succeed where others have failed. However, the window of opportunity appears to be open. 
