15/12/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 15/12/10 
Sunday's (December 12th) election in Kosovo's Serb enclaves prompted the participation of more parties than in the previous vote, as well as fist fights at polling stations, accusations of vote "purchasing" and the confiscation of unused ballots. 
Serbs in the north staged a mass boycott of the election. 
"The turnout of Serbs was as predicted; a boycott in the north and pockets of participation in the south. The economic situation in Kosovo is such that public sector jobs are particularly precious, hence why many Serbs south of the Ibar have decided to participate. For the sake of their day-to-day existence, they simply can't afford to take the same stance as those in the north," Transconflict founder Ian Bancroft told SETimes. 
Out of the 29 tickets in the Kosovo election, eight were from the Serb community. The battle for dominance among Serb voters in central and southern Kosovo was waged by the Liberal Party and the United Serb Ticket. 
The Liberal Party was part of the previous government, and announced it would again form a coalition with Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo. 
On the other hand, United Serb Ticket worked to leave the impression of a party supported by the Serbian government. The head of the ticket was Randjel Nojkic, a senior official of the Serbian Rewnwal Movement, which is part of Serbia's ruling coalition. 
The majority of votes went to the Liberal Party, which expects to gain more than ten seats in parliament. According to their data, out of the 55,000 Serbs who live in central and southern Kosovo, about 13,000 voted for the Liberal Party. The United Serb Ticket garnered 5,000 votes, while the other Serb tickets were far behind. 
The preliminary count of the Serb turnout is at around 20,000. 
Hitches developed almost immediately Sunday. The United Serb Ticket has accused the Liberal Party of purchasing votes, threatening voters and physically assaulting United Serb Ticket activists. Claiming they have evidence to support their accusations, officials of the United Serb Ticket have called for a repeat election in Serb enclaves and have complained to international representatives in Kosovo. 
Ticket member Rada Trajkovic accuses Serbian Ministry for Kosovo and Metohija senior official Oliver Ivanovic of favouring the Liberal Party due to family relations. 
Ivanovic dismissed the accusations and said he had been clearly implementing the Serbian government's policy for a boycott. 
However, top ministry for Kosovo and Metohija officials have made different statements regarding the Kosovo election. While Ivanovic said he was concerned by the Serb turnout in the election because it showed that Belgrade was losing touch with them, Minister Goran Bogdanovic voiced a different concern. 
"It is sad that the grim reality of conflicts between the Serbs was revealed, that there were several incidents, cases of theft and fist fights. That sends a bad message," Bogdanovic said. 
