12/02/2010
(AFP, Deutsche Welle, BBC, AKI, RFE/RL, Fena, Focus News Agency - 11/02/10; B92 - 10/02/10; AFP - 09/02/10; Radio Srbija - 08/02/10)
Shunning warnings from the international community, the parliament of Republika Srpska (RS) adopted a law Wednesday (February 10th) that could pave the way for a future referendum on the entity's independence, further destabilising Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
Amendments to the law on plebiscites -- tabled by RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik's ruling Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) -- were approved after two days of heated debate in the 83-seat assembly. The new legislation was passed 46 to 16, with six abstentions. Bosniak members of the RS parliament boycotted the vote, insisting the bill violates both the Dayton Peace Accords and the BiH Constitution. 
The law allows citizens of the Serb-run entity to hold referenda on national issues while only covering a few technical aspects, such as voting procedure and the manner in which a plebiscite can be called. It does not specify when a referendum can be organised or which questions will be asked. 
Dodik has repeatedly threatened to call a referendum on RS's independence if the entity's autonomy was at risk. While he has not made direct secessionist threats in recent months, he raised the plebiscite issue in December when the RS parliament rejected High Representative Valentin Inzko's decision to extend the mandates of foreign judges and prosecutors working in Bosnian courts. 
Dodik denied on Tuesday that the new Law on Referendum and Civic Initiative was aimed at facilitating the entity's secession from BiH or violating the Dayton Accords. 
 "We want to pass a law and then call a referendum about support of the Dayton Peace Agreement and decisions disparaging it," he said. 
Dodik has often challenged the authority of Inzko, the top international envoy who -- under Dayton -- has overarching powers in BiH, including the ability to impose laws and fire elected officials. 
The RS prime minister -- currently under investigation by foreign prosecutors for alleged involvement in corruption -- insists that there is no need for an international presence in the country's legal system. The entity's citizens, Dodik says, should decide all such matters. 
The law was approved despite the international community's stated warnings that plebiscites on such questions could further undermine BiH's stability. 
 "While a referendum can be a legitimate mechanism in the right circumstances, it can be counterproductive, and even provocative, when used to pursue a narrow political agenda," the US Embassy in Sarajevo said in a statement Tuesday. "The United States would consider provocative any referendum that threatens the stability, sovereignty or territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina." 
Inzko has reportedly warned the leaders of Bosnian Serb parties, which backed the law, the passing of this referendum would further isolate RS from the European and world communities. 
