29/07/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Mitrovica – 29/07/11 
US KFOR troops moved to Kosovo's northern border Thursday (July 28th) and secured the area around Gate 1 at Jarinje, while German troops secured Gate 31 at Brnjak. 
KFOR Commander General Erhard Buhler issued the order to take control of the border after more than 50 masked men, allegedly armed Serbs, set fire to Gate 1. 
Buhler declared the two crossings a restricted military area and approved the use of lethal force to protect KFOR soldiers, civilians, and property. 
"I cannot exclude another attempt, but of course, both gates are declared military restricted areas and the rules of engagement are very clear," Buhler told Reuters. 
KFOR announced in a statement there are "confirmed reports of shots fired at KFOR personnel in the vicinity" during the Jarinje incident. 
Buhler added that persons unauthorised to work at the crossings or pass through them should not be in their vicinity. 
Serbia's chief negotiator Borko Stefanovic countered that KFOR is acting outside UN Resolution 1244. 
The Serbian government issued a statement saying that in capturing Jarinje and Brnjak, the intent is "not to establish law and order but to impose forcefully, even at the cost of human lives, a change in the whole reality in the north of the province". 
With the arrival of KFOR troops at the border, the Kosovo government announced Thursday that the situation is under full control but tensions remain. 
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci addressed the nation via a televised speech in which he condemned the Serb attacks and accused Belgrade of ordering and financing them. 
"These violent acts are ordered, co-ordinated and led by the highest political structures of the Serbian government. This is really unfortunate," Thaci said. 
He assured the public that there is no turning back and the government will not allow the partitioning of northern Kosovo. 
Analysts say, however, that Kosovo has entered its most difficult period since declaring independence three years ago. 
The situation shows a lack of regional stability and trust between Kosovo and Serbia, Lumnije Gashi, of the Kosovo Institute for Governance and Public Policy, told SETimes. 
"It is clear to everyone that the status quo in northern Kosovo is not sustainable anymore, and action is needed to be able to change the mood of conflict there," Gashi said. 
Security Studies professor Abdullah Hajdari told SETimes the international community is worried and tired of the impasse in northern Kosovo. Most statements by the EU, UK, Germany and France, Hajdari said, do not condemn the action but are critical about how it was planned. 
"Pristina will go ahead and deploy police and customs officers in the north, because there is a feeling that if it gives up and pulls back, Kosovo will lose northern Kosovo," he said. 
Kosovo Minister of Trade and Industry Mimoza Kusari told RTK that at Gate 31, Kosovo customs officers are already deployed and working. 
Tensions rose earlier this week after Kosovo security forces attempted to wrest control of several border crossings from Serb border police. Kosovo accused the Serb police of failing to implement a reciprocal ban on Serbian goods entering Kosovo and acting as a parallel security force, taking orders from Belgrade. 
