26/03/2009
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 26/03/09
The Swedish milk factory Swedmilk is the biggest foreign investor in Macedonia's milk industry. Despite a promising start, it has amassed big debts to employees and the Macedonian farmers who supply it with milk. It owes 2,500 farmers nearly 3.5m euros. 
Swedmilk manager Roger Oscarson blames the efforts of a shareholder -- M&A Beverage -- to take over his firm. M&A Beverage owns 37% of Swedmilk's stock. 
Oscarson says that he was unaware of the deteriorating situation until November 4th 2008, when he met with M&A Beverage representatives. "They have told me their company is very weak financially and it would be difficult to save it," Oscarson said. 
 He and partner Josif Sarzoski proposed selling their shares to M&A Beverage at a very low price, a move that a third shareholder, Swedfond, would have supported and joined. The idea fell through, however, amid revelations that M&A had been planning a takeover for months. 
Swedmilk, he insists, has been purchasing all of its milk from domestic producers. Last July, the company arranged sales in Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and other countries, together with an M&A Beverage partner. 
However, Oscarson claims, the partner broke the agreement and the milk was not exported, causing Swedmilk serious economic problems. 
Pece Shambevski, a Macedonian milk producer, says Swedmilk owes him more than 100,000 euros. "I make my living from producing milk and do not want the factory to go bankrupt. That way we will get nothing and only the creditors will benefit." 
Once Swedmilk entered Macedonia, farmers were encouraged to take credits to produce milk. Farmers are now completely bankrupt because they "cannot pay out our credits to the banks", says Shambevski. 
Good news appeared to be in store after a US-Israeli company, Phoenix Energy, decided to purchase Swedmilk for 1m euros, following intensive negotiations -- with Macedonian government assistance. Part of the deal included extending bank credits to farmers in order to reprogramme their debts. 
Farmers were initially optimistic. "We were promised that we will get the money and we [still] expect that plan to materialise," Nadmi Kezimi from the Macedonian Farmer Federation said. 
So far, though, the money has not been forthcoming. Having exhausted the available means, the farmers have taken to the street. They organised protests in front of government buildings and have blocked main roads and highways, while asking police to arrest Moshe Baum, the new owner of the milk factory. They say he has broken his promises. 
A particularly dissatisfied group of protesters wanted to take over the milk factory, but police prevented that. According to the farmers, they have greater rights to the factory than a "false investor" who they say is turning a profit without paying its bills. 
