17/05/2011
By Ozgur Ogret for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 17/05/11
Concerned about the the planned introduction of internet filtering systems in Turkey, several thousand people took to the streets in 25 cities Sunday (May 15th) to protest the system. 
The filters will be introduced starting in August, as part of the country's "Safe Internet Service" programme. Authorities say the controls are voluntary and do not amount to censorship, but opponents of the plan disagree. 
Law student Ezgi Koksal helped organise one of the marches Sunday. She says the impetus for the protests came from a Facebook event she and a few friends started. It attracted 80,000 members in its first day. 
It is an independent, grassroots-style campaign, Koksal said. 
"We take an opposing stance to the [internet politics] of the current administration; we are not affiliated with an organisation apart from our own," she said. 
Starting on August 22nd, internet users in Turkey will have the option of choosing from among three different filtering packages. The "domestic" package will feature websites from Turkey only. A "children's" package will include websites determined by the state-run Telecommunication Authority (BTK) to be child-friendly, while the "family" package will include all non-banned sites. 
Internet providers are required to offer these packages for free. Attempting to overcome the filters will be considered a criminal act. 
If the customer does not make a choice, he or she will be given the standard package, which does not filter the sites. 
BTK argues the plan does not amount to censorship. The filters, it insists, are optional and people who do not want them would be able to continue their current internet use. 
But Sedat Kapanoglu, owner of a popular social platform called Eksi Sozluk, disagrees. He says a "censorship system" is already in place, since BTK can shut down websites without a court order, as it has done with tens of thousands of sites. 
"Even if you choose the 'filter free' package called 'standard', you return to the internet which is already under censorship," he told SETimes. 
"Most importantly, the filter system allows the content of your connection [to be followed]," he said. "It is not technically possible for them to keep records of everywhere we connect but it is easily possible to keep records of people who reach undesirable locations and write undesirable things." 
Lawyer Mehmet Ali Koksal, legal counsel at the Turkish Informatics Association, said he is not against legal control of the internet in theory. But BTK has not consulted NGOs and academics and its expertise is questionable, he added. 
When asked about worries that Turkey is following in China's footsteps regarding internet access, Koksal said "People got used to the bans in effect currently. After they have accepted the filter, what happens if tomorrow the ruling administration decides the family package should be the standard?" 
Koksal told SETimes that his worry is internet freedom will become curtailed to the point that it will become extinct. 
