02/01/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 02/01/09
More than two weeks after a student-organised protest, the student-run radio station at Ss. Cyril and Methodius University remains closed. Students protested outside their rector's office earlier this month, wearing symbolic gags to protest alleged violations of freedom of speech. 
Their main grievance was the closure of the radio station by the university rector six weeks earlier. The loss of the station strikes particularly hard, since Studentski Zbor, the campus newspaper, ceased publication years ago.
Maja Stojanova, one of the students, complained that besides their radio station and newspaper, they had lost the "Oration Evenings at the Faculty of Law ... there is no place where students can express themselves, and there is no student organisation aware of this". 
Others went into more detail about the recently transformed Oration Evenings, complaining that professors now impose topics rather than allowing participants to choose their own. This year's contestants had to join either of two teams that debated homosexual marriage. Rather than give their imprimatur to what they consider a charade, disaffected orators spoke off campus, free of official coercion but losing out on publicity. 
An anonymous former Oration Evenings participant said in the past the press devoted regular and thorough coverage to the event, allowing the unfiltered voice of students to reach the public. This year such coverage was absent, whether out of apathy towards a controlled event, government pressure to ignore student discontent or inability to find the locations of the privately delivered speeches. 
In his own defence, University Rector Velimir Stojkoski says he closed the radio station to save money. He has ordered an audit of its financial activities, implying they were wasteful. "The fact is [the station spent] 57,000 euros, and there is no force or argument to challenge this," Stojkoski insisted. 
Campus organisations have reacted in different ways. The Youth Educational Forum, an NGO, has supported the protest, while the speaker of the student parliament says the radio station offered poor programming and that its abolition did not abridge freedom of speech. 
Most students agree that, despite the furor over the alleged loss of free-speech rights, they might be better served by spotlighting more practical concerns. Among these, they emphasise poor living conditions and interference by political parties in campus leadership elections. Undergraduates were especially vocal about such shortcomings during International Students' Day, November 17th. 
The unhappy students complained that dormitories are in catastrophic condition and unsuited for living and studying. They contend the typical dormitory in Skopje is a dilapidated, prefabricated building with poor sanitation and tiny rooms lacking central heating. 
