20/04/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 20/04/09
Serbia is among the European countries with the highest proportion of smokers. According to the ministry of health, about a third of Serbia's 7-million-plus citizens smoke, nearly 38% of men and 30% of women. 
Srmena Krstev, president of Serbia's Commission for the Prevention of Smoking, told the Southeast European Times the age at which they begin is dropping constantly. "About 8% of teenagers, ages 13 to 15, periodically light up a cigarette. A third of them had their first cigarette at the age of ten," she said. 
In some countries, such as Greece and Turkey, nearly half the men smoke. However, the percentage of women who light up in those countries is much lower than in Serbia. "Serbia's only 'rival' in the number of smokers among European countries is Bosnia and Herzegovina," she said. 
To address the growing health problems posed by smoking, the health ministry has proposed existing amendments to the law prohibiting smoking in enclosed spaces. The new law will be stricter and will cover all public spaces and workplaces, including cafes, restaurants and other service-related facilities. 
 Belgrade intends to harmonise the law with those in Europe. Implementation would occur in phases: first banning smoking in the workplace; next, establishing smokers' areas in public facilities like restaurants; and finally, banning the practise altogether in public spaces. Implementing the law will not be easy, as resistance is expected. To avoid potential problems, "the document … will be very clear and its implementation strictly defined," said Krstev. 
Awareness of tobacco's harmful effects is growing, particularly of the dangers of secondhand smoke. "If a third of the population smokes, we have to think about the other two thirds .... whose health may still be harmed", she added. 
The ministry of health plans a series of intensive campaigns to spread the message more systematically, said Krstev. A current campaign -- "Cigarette smoke is a serial killer" -- aims to scare smokers into worrying about their health. It is already showing results: from 2006 to 2008, 7% of men and 3% of women quit smoking. 
The next campaign will appeal to smokers to "Cut out the cigarette smoke". The goal is to point out smoking causes a great number of illnesses, some of which may be deadly. 
Cigarettes are the most common cause of malignant illnesses, strokes and heart attacks. Smoking is particularly harmful during pregnancy, Krstev said, and can cause serious health problems to children long after infancy. 
