01/11/2005
By Vassilis Vassiliou for Southeast European Times in Athens – 01/11/05
Asbestos is a very durable insulating material that has been widely used in construction, piping and heating, the production of flagstones, the insides of ovens and even in car brakes. It also has potentially devastating effects on the human respiratory system and is the number one cause of lung cancer among non-smokers. 
Although long recognised as a danger, the use of asbestos has only been banned in the EU as of this year. Greece, where thousands of tonnes of asbestos have been used -- often in hospitals and schools -- now faces a costly cleanup. 
The numerous workers who have dealt with asbestos face a high probability of getting sick, even if the contact was more than 30 years ago. While their chances of illness are considerable, their ability to get treatment is compromised. Insurance companies refuse to cover asbestos workers, and the government has yet to follow other European countries in legislating compensatory coverage. 
On the public education front, the employment and social care ministry has launched a new campaign to promote asbestos-free working environments. Scientists from Britain are joining their Greek colleagues in drawing public attention to the long-term health repercussions. The ministry, meanwhile, has assembled a national committee that will draw up a record of workplaces where asbestos is present. 
"Our target is to find ways to protect those who have been exposed, by establishing and legislating, for example, that mesothelioma -- a form of cancer that covers the lung's membranes -- is included among the work-related illnesses," Employment Minister Panos Panagiotopoulos said. 
These are first steps. But much more will need to be done in order to align Greece with the rest of the EU when it comes to this serious health issue. 
Asbestos is based on silicon and magnesium and has a fibrous structure that is resistant to high temperatures. Asbestos molecules are airborne and the material can cause severe organic damage to those who inhale it. Asbestos exposure also can be a life-long source of lung infections. 
The material can also cause amiantiasis, a degenerative illness that slowly destroys human lungs, roughening lung tissue and killing cells. Asbestos also has been viewed as a possible cause of Sudden Infantile Death Syndrome (SIDS). 
People who work in asbestos mines and in the production of asbestos cement or other asbestos products are in grave danger, according to experts. House builders, workers in shipyards and their families are among the high-risk groups. 
