15/02/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 15/02/07
Serbia's new parliament convened on Wednesday (February 14th), and the first document it adopted was a resolution on the talks on the status of Kosovo. In it, parliament said it rejects all aspects of UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's Kosovo status plan that could lead to independence for the province, whose population is 90% Albanian. 
The parliament also renewed the mandate of Serbia's negotiating team and authorised it to represent Belgrade's interests in those parts of the upcoming talks that deal with decentralisation, the protection of Serb religious heritage, and the formation of new municipalities with a Serb majority. The next round of talks is set to kick off in Vienna on February 21st and last until March 1st, with a final review meeting on March 10th. 
Wednesday's resolution was adopted after an eight-hour debate, during which Serbian President Boris Tadic and Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica addressed the representatives. All caucuses voted in favour, except for Cedomir Jovanovic's Liberal Democrats and their allies, who argued that Kosovo's independence is a fact Serbia must acknowledge. 
"We must accept the fact that Kosovo has been practically independent for the past seven years," Jovanovic told the deputies. 
The sole representative of the Albanian minority in Serbia also declined to support the resolution. Describing Ahtisaari's proposal as a good start, he said Serbia should accept it. 
Kostunica, however, said the blueprint was a "proposal for tearing Serbia into pieces". 
"It is a proposal that uses the example of Serbia to deny the UN Charter, violates the principles of international law, ignores the will of the Serbian people expressed in the recent referendum, and also ignores the Serbian Constitution," he told lawmakers. 
Tadic, meanwhile, said Serbia could not accept an independent Kosovo, but must keep negotiating in Vienna. "The essence of Ahtisaari's plan is clear. It is basically a plan that opens the way for Kosovo's independence, which violates the sovereignty and territorial integrity of our state -- which Ahtisaari does not even mention." 
The representatives of the far-right Serbian Radical Party showed up in parliament wearing white T-shirts emblazoned with the image of their leader, Vojislav Seselj, who is currently on trial before the UN war crimes tribunal. Party deputy leader Tomislav Nikolic argued that Serbia should stop negotiating if it could not influence the issue of status in Ahtisaari's proposal. 
Under the constitution, a new government must be formed within three months of the parliament's convocation. This means a deadline of May 14th. Representatives of the parliamentary parties say serious talks on a new cabinet have not yet been held. Most analysts, however, believe that Kostunica and Tadic's parties will be at the core of any new government. 
