26/04/2006
(DPA, FT - 26/04/06; Reuters, AFP, HINA, MIA, Makfax - 25/04/06)
Albania, Croatia and Macedonia said on Tuesday (25 April) that they expect to get a clear signal from NATO in November that they will be invited to join the 26-nation Alliance soon after. 
In the spirit of the 1998 US-Baltic Charter, in early May 2003, the three Balkan countries signed an Adriatic Charter with the United States, aimed at facilitating their integration into NATO. 
Some seven months before the Alliance's summit in Riga in November, the foreign and defence ministers of the three Adriatic Charter countries and their Estonian, Latvian and Lithuanian counterparts gathered for a two-day meeting Tuesday on Croatia's Brijuni islands. A US delegation, led by Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian affairs Rosemary DiCarlo, is also taking part in the discussions. 
The Adriatic Charter countries "expect from the Riga summit a clear signal that their achievements will be evaluated and that membership invitations will be sent as soon as possible," Croatian Foreign Minister Kolinda Grabar Kitarovic said on Tuesday. 
Speaking at a joint news conference with other participants in the Brijuni meeting, her Macedonian counterpart, Ilinka Mitreva, echoed those sentiments, and praised the productive partnership shared by the three countries. 
"There is a new era of peace, democracy and prosperity on the Balkans," the Mitreva said. "If the Alliance wants to stand firmly behind this new, positive Balkan story, I am convinced that the solution is simple -- Macedonia, Albania and Croatia should become full-fledged NATO members." 
Taking into account progress the three countries have made, the Riga summit should send a clear message "that will lead us on the road to membership invitations in the next round of enlargement, not later than 2008, for the good of both the region and the Alliance," Mitreva added. 
Albanian Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu said he also expects a firm timetable regarding his country's status in NATO, Croatian news agency HINA reported. 
The issues discussed during the first day of the meeting included the three NATO hopefuls' involvement in Alliance-led missions. Representatives of the Baltic countries, which joined NATO in April 2004 along with four other former communist countries, spoke about their experience on the road to membership. 
Speaking on behalf of the three Baltic states, Latvian Foreign Minister Artis Pabriks recommended that the three Balkan countries organise comprehensive public awareness campaigns to explain the advantages of NATO membership, which he said, significantly reduces a country's security costs. 
Albania, Croatia and Macedonia have made great progress in implementing necessary reforms and in meeting NATO membership criteria, said DiCarlo, voicing hope that the three would be invited to join the Alliance in 2008. The United States, she stressed, is committed to the establishment of lasting peace and stability in Southeast Europe and would continue to support the Charter. 
"Europe cannot be stable and peaceful without a stable and peaceful Balkans, and the Adriatic Charter helps us in the realisation of that objective," Macedonian news agency MIA quoted DiCarlo as saying. 
Ahead of an informal, two-day meeting of NATO foreign ministers opening in Sofia on Thursday, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer said the aspiring members' expectations for a positive signal on enlargement are legitimate and would be discussed this week. 
