01/02/2007
(Blic - 01/02/07; AP, DPA, AKI, UPI, Beta, B92 - 31/01/07)
With talks on a new government coalition under way in Serbia, the ruling Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) unveiled on Wednesday (January 31st) a set of Kosovo-related conditions under which it would agree to join the country's next cabinet. 
The platform, sent to the Serbian media by the DSS and its coalition partner in the January 21st parliamentary elections, the New Serbia (NS) party, insisted that the new government should make the preservation of the country's territorial integrity its "first constitutional obligation". 
The DSS handed the document to President Boris Tadic on Tuesday during the ongoing consultations on formation of a governing coalition. The DSS made its stand public two days before UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's visit to Belgrade on Friday, when he will deliver his proposal for a solution to the Kosovo status issue. 
While the details of Ahtisaari's plan have not been revealed, it is widely expected to set out a roadmap that will pave the way to Kosovo's eventual statehood. The proposal, which is still subject to change, reportedly will allow individual countries to recognise Kosovo as a sovereign state, if they wish. 
"Any country that decides to recognise independence (of Kosovo) must bear in mind that this will result in serious consequences to their relations with Serbia," Belgrade-based Beta news agency quoted the DSS-NS platform as reading. Ahtisaari's proposal reportedly will also allow Kosovo to apply for membership in international organisations, such as the UN, EU, the World Bank and IMF. 
"In the event that any country or international organisation decides to recognise the independence of Kosovo and Metohija, the Serbian government will inform the governments of all internationally recognised countries that it denounces such a decision as illegal, illegitimate and void," said the DSS-NS platform. 
It also warned NATO member states that if any of them recognises Kosovo as an independent country, this would lead to "a serious deterioration of relations" between Serbia and the Alliance. 
Observers saw the move by Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's DSS as diminishing the chances for the formation of a pro-European ruling coalition among the country's democratic forces. 
The DSS-NS coalition finished third in Serbia's election, winning 47 seats. Those results gave Kostunica a kingmaker role in formation of the new government. His coalition could join forces either with the ultra nationalist Serbian Radical Party (SRS), which won the largest number of votes, or Tadic's Democratic Party (DS), which finished second. 
The conditions set by Kostunica's party bring its position on Kosovo closer to that of the SRS. While the DS and former Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic's G17 Plus have also voiced opposition to Kosovo becoming independent, both have shown greater flexibility on the issue. 
The only Serbian party to openly support independence for Kosovo is the Liberal Democratic Party of former Deputy Prime Minister Cedomir Jovanovic. 
