06/12/2010
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 06/12/10
As soon as you enter the Agos premises in Istanbul's upscale suburb of Osmanbey, you immediately realise it's no ordinary newspaper. 
Security cameras pan the street entrance and stairwell, and before entering the old, narrow, wood-floored office, you first pass through a security area made of steel and bulletproof glass. 
Once inside, you are immediately confronted with a huge portrait photo, framed with fairy lights, of the man whose death necessitated these security measures: the paper's founder Hrant Dink. 
Dink was shot dead outside the offices in 2007 in an assassination allegedly linked to elements within Turkey's "Deep State". He had turned the newspaper from a mouth piece for Turkey's small Armenian community, using it to address some of the most sensitive issues surrounding modern Turkey's cultural and ethnic identity. Many people believe he paid for this with his life. 
 His latest successor as editor-in-chief of the weekly newspaper, Rober Koptas, who took over from Etyen Mahcupyen in June, spoke to SETimes about Agos, Dink's legacy, and the challenges facing Turkey's Armenian community. 
 SETimes: How has Agos changed since its foundation? Is it just a newspaper for the Armenian community in Turkey, or has it become something more than that? 
 Rober Koptas: Thanks to the efforts of Hrant Dink, Agos became more influential paper than was expected when it was founded. As you said, in the beginning it was only a community paper published in Turkish and Armenian and it was regarded as a platform to express the problems of the Armenian community of Turkey -- of Istanbul mostly. 
But during time, Agos became a platform for not only Armenians, but also some other ethnic or religious groups of Turkey, or some opposing minority or political groups that suffered from discrimination or nationalism. So now we have some Armenian columnists, some non-Armenian writers. We have Armenian readers and non-Armenian readers, the number is equal, so we can say that Agos has crossed the borders of the Armenian community and has become a paper of the whole of Turkey. Agos is small in numbers but big in its effect. 
 SETimes: What is your plan for the paper as editor-in-chief? 
 Koptas: The main motives of Agos are not going to be changed: the democratisation of the country, human rights issues, the rights of religious groups, mostly Armenian and some others. We're going to try to be better journalists and work harder. Agos in its essence has an amateur spirit, which is very important for us but we're going to blend this amateurship with a professional working style. 
 SETimes: What are the benefits of that amateur spirit? 
 Koptas: Of course it becomes a more lively paper whose borders are not so defined; every problem of the people can be our topic. In a professional paper it's not easy to contribute as a reader but Agos is more open to that. 
The other thing is that our paper, like every person in Turkey, has a problem with Turkish nationalism. We can express ourselves in a more human way than some other professional papers because we're suffering from that attitude that discriminates Armenians against Turks or Kurds against Turks. 
 SETimes: One of your predecessors as editor was Hrant Dink, who was murdered outside these offices. Why was he killed? 
 Koptas: Because he was very dangerous in the eyes of Turkish ultranationalists. He was always crossing the border: he was Armenian but not an "acceptable" Armenian as they defined, because the ordinary Armenian doesn't have the right to speak, but he was speaking very loudly. He was not an ordinary journalist: he was touching every critical issue of Turkey. 
He became a bridge between these ethnic groups -- Kurds, Turks, Armenians -- and he was a kind of model of a future Turkish citizen, I think, because he had strong ties with his culture and identity, but he also tried to understand Turks and Islam. Because of that he was a dangerous man and they knew that killing him could destroy a lot of positive things.
 SETimes: Do you think they were right in thinking that? What was the effect of his death? 
 Koptas: It created a huge impact on Turkish society. It became a milestone. The killers did not expect that thousands of people would march crying, 'We are all Hrant, we are all Armenian'. This was the first time in Turkish history that people came together to cry for an Armenian. 
The emergence of these ideas created space for discussion about history, about today, and about the future. Hrant Dink's assassination helped Turkish society because it created a space for us to discuss more freely Turkish identity, Armenians, the Kurdish issue. 
 SETimes: I'd like to ask a bit more about the problems Armenians have with Turkish nationalism. I understand that your given name is Rober, but your legal name is Murat. Could you say why that is? 
 Koptas: Being an Armenian can sometimes be dangerous in Turkish society, and my father had a fear that when I went to military service, my Armenian name could be a problem for me. Because of that fear he decided to record me as Murat, a Turkish name. This fear still continues for most Armenians; they use some other names when they're in markets, when they're making business. They're hiding their own names and using Turkish names. 
Up until now, the Turkish state has regarded Armenians as second-class citizens. They have the right to have the property of our institutions, our foundations, and our churches. 
This concept of second-class citizenship has been reflected in society because when the people see that Armenians aren't regarded as equal citizens they create an image of Armenians as foreigners so they feel they have the right to discriminate against them. Being an Armenian can become an image of an enemy, a hostile people. So this discrimination on an official level has an effect on the society level. 
 SETimes: Do you think these kinds of problems are getting better? How has it changed in the past few years? 
 Koptas: Relatively speaking, it's going better because 20 years ago it was impossible to speak about these issues and Turkish intellectuals were not aware of these problems. Only Armenians were defending their rights and Kurds were defending their own rights, but now it has become a mixture: now there's a group of intellectuals [of all ethnicities] opposing this kind of discrimination.
A young generation is growing up with these ideas so people can see that nationalism is not as good as the state has told people. 
 SETimes: You recently attended the service at the Surp Khach church on Akdamar (Akhtamar) Island, the first time the church had been open in 95 years. What are your reflections on that service? 
 Koptas: Before the ceremony my feelings were very mixed. It was a historical moment for us because 95 years on, there would be a religious ceremony in Akhtamar, which is a symbol of Armenian culture and Armenian history in these lands. 
But on the other hand we know the Turkish state used this renovation and ceremony as a tool of propaganda. It was very clear. But I believe that we can change this propaganda in a positive way by showing to the world and Turkey that there were Armenians in these lands, they had culture here, they had religious foundations, they had churches, schools etc, and if we can use it as a platform to show people that this is a symbol of Armenian losses, only by acknowledging these losses and facing this history we can build a peaceful future. 
