14/06/2010
By Panayiotis Koumantaros and HK Tzanis in Port Elizabeth and Athens for Southeast European Times -- 14/06/10
"Not only was the grapevine broken, but the donkey ate it," is a timeless Greek adage. It perfectly fits the mood of the Greek national football team after its 2-0 World Cup loss to the Republic of Korea on Saturday (June 12th). 
Greece's high-priced players were listless as the match started, apparently due to a major falling-out at the hotel two hours before the match began, when German skipper Otto Rehhagel announced the starting line-up. 
According to reports, some Greek players openly vented their displeasure at his choices, with towering Liverpool FC defender Sotiris Kyrgiakos mistaking "some type of object" for a football he needed to kick away after being told he wouldn't start. 
Only after the highly disciplined Koreans scored a second goal against them did the team finally seem galvanised into action. It was too little, too late. An all-offensive rush in the match's last 20 minutes couldn't undo what had come before. 
The lack of camaraderie on the field was all too visible. In the 28th minute, goalkeeper Alexandros Tzorvas had to intervene to cool off defender and fellow Panathinaikos teammate Loukas Vyntras, beside himself over a serious mistake by co-defender Avraam Papadopoulos. 
Papadopoulos plays for Olympiakos Piraeus, Panathinaikos's bitter cross-town rival. 
The 2010 World Cup will probably witness the last games that Rehhagel will coach from the Greek bench, as his contract expires afterwards. The 72-year-old coach is credited as the architect of Greece's miraculous 2004 victory in the European championship, but many see his tenure as having come full circle. 
The sour mood continued after the match, with team captain Giorgos Karagounis, a former Inter Milan midfielder who returned to Panathinaikos to end his career, declaring that he is "embittered from his substitution". 
 "I don't want to talk now," he added, raising speculation that he will have much to say after the tournament. 
 For the superstitious, the matchup with Korea was lost even before the New Zealand referee blew the opening whistle, as the team's commemorative photo minutes before match time was a spectacular disaster. The starting 11 players reportedly assembled at the wrong spot on the field, with those standing in the second row brilliantly illuminated by the afternoon sun, while those crouching in the front row were in the shade. 
 Photographers' pleas to reshoot the starting lineup at another spot fell on deaf ears, with the result being completely unusable. 
That turned out to be all too accurate an omen for a match in which all five forwards on the Greek roster saw playing time, yet couldn't produce a single goal. 
