07/03/2005
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 07/03/05
Late last month, Albania announced it would increase its number of peacekeeping troops in Iraq. Defence ministry officials confirmed that 50 more troops would join the 70-strong contingent serving in Mosul as part of the international coalition, bringing the total to 120. 
The decision, part of an overall restructuring of the Albanian unit, will take effect during a rotation in April. At that time, soldiers currently serving a six-month tour of duty in Iraq will return home. 
 Albania, which aspires to NATO membership, currently has a total of 200 troops in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The country has been a steadfast supporter of US policy in Iraq, and is one of only four nations to contribute troops to the combat phase of Operation Enduring Freedom. Its forces in Iraq currently are serving under US command in a non-combat role, mainly patrolling the airport in Mosul. 
A statement from the Albanian Council of Ministers said 120 troops is the "optimal number" needed for the country to fulfil its mission according to NATO standards. As part of the changes, an Albanian officer will become part of the command of coalition forces, the government said. 
The decision comes after parliament voted in November 2004 to allow the country to join the EU's peacekeeping mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), which took over responsibilities from NATO in December. Seventy Albanian troops are serving there as part of the South East European Brigade (SEEBRIG), created in 1998 and made up of Albania, Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia, Greece, Italy, Slovenia, Romania, Turkey and the United States. SEEBRIG was created to co-ordinate efforts among countries that were not NATO members at the time. 
Albania's role in peacekeping operations has strong public support and is seen as vital to the country's efforts to join Euro-Atlantic structures. Its membership in NATO's Partnership for Peace programme is a step towards eventual integration into the Alliance. At the same time, Albania is working with Croatia and Macedonia within the framework of the Adriatic Charter initiative, under which the three NATO aspirants have agreed to co-operate in achieving their mutual goal of entering the Alliance. 
