12/12/2011
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 12/12/11
Ombudsperson Sami Kurteshi is growing increasingly concerned by the lack of support his office is receiving from main Kosovo institutions, including the assembly and the government. 
The situation deteriorated this year, says Kurteshi, as it became increasingly clear he could not maintain a professional staff given limited finances and salaries. For starters, five deputies hired last month won't be paid until the end of this month, because they weren't added to the wage system as required. 
Then there's the issue of office space. The building in which the office was located changed hands, leading to eviction. "The public premises we used were privatised and the government didn't ensure offices for us," Kurteshi tells SETimes, from his rented office in a little visited location in Pristina. 
In June, Kurteshi wrote to the assembly, documenting the various obstacles preventing him from exercising Ombudsman's independence. He offered seven recommendations but got no response. 
The shortcomings had been cited as well in this year's EU Progress Report, which described the ombudsman as a weak institution "due to the lack of political support to ensure its proper functioning and financial independence". While the assembly elected five deputies to assist the ombudsman as required by law, it never addressed the financial concerns. 
In 2010, the ombudsman received a total of 1,233 visits from individuals seeking advice and help. By September 1st 2011, the ombudsman institution received about 1,000 complaints. The level of success seems largely based on the level of the institutions involved. 
"The lower institution involved gives a better response and the contrary, the upper institution involved gives no response to complaints," says Kurteshi. 
Deputy Minister of Public Administration Hajredin Hyseni is aware of the ombudsman position and his deputies' pay issues. He told SETimes that salary problem that will be resolved quickly. 
Permanent office space is a priority, Hyseni says, adding he hopes this will be resolved next year as the government will take over new office premises in Pristina. 
"We have more independent institutions renting work premises in absence of sufficient space, but the ombudsman is the priority for the government," he said. 
Kurteshi became ombudsman in 2009 and is serving a five-year term. 
He was in office last year when the assembly passed a new law mandating the obligations and responsibilities for the institution. Kurteshi says the last changes in the draft challenged the performance of the institution. The law limits his immunity to the time he holds the post, and excludes this right for experts responsible for conducting investigations. 
"Our officials are obliged by law to keep secrets but there is no immunity for them. This is the slave principal, when someone has obligations but no rights," says Kurteshi. 
The immunity issue is a concern shared by Suzan Novoberdali, chairperson of the Kosovo Assembly Commission on Human Rights, Gender Equality, Missing Persons and Petitions. 
"Regarding immunity I completely support him, because of the activities they conduct during the mandate they should not be afraid of responsibilities tomorrow," Novoberdali told SETimes. 
But she also blames Kurteshi for the absence of safeguards, as he himself was a member of draft-law group. He argues that changes occurred in the final version, amended by the government and adopted by the assembly. 
Given these difficulties, Kurteshi thinks the government seems "interested in destroying the only human rights institution in Kosovo". 
But Hyseni bristles at the notion. "I don't think the government, or anyone else in Kosovo, is interested in weakening the role of the ombudsperson, because it's an institution with a significant role in defending human rights and freedoms." 
"In the current circumstances, it's difficult to have an ombudsperson with a bigger effect [given] that it has only recommendation authority, not mandatory," Behxhet Shala, head of the Council for Defence of Human Rights and Freedoms, told SETimes. 
According to him, it's difficult to enforce the role because there is no will for having an ombudsperson that is fully independent and politically unbiased, since the biggest violator of human rights in Kosovo is the state itself. 
While Kurteshi complains of operating amid a challenging environment, officials and human rights experts maintain that at a certain level, success depends on the performance and behaviour of the institution head. They think that being effective in Kosovo requires an active role and openly challenging main institutions in terms of human rights. 
