05/02/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 05/02/09
The "gas war" between Russia and Ukraine in early January revealed Serbia's dangerous dependence on energy imports. The crisis caught Belgrade without gas reserves, and it ended up depending on emergency imports from Hungary and Germany. At the same time, the power grid faced collapse due to a dramatic increase in electricity consumption. 
The Serbian power company Elektroprivreda Srbije opened tenders for the construction of new production facilities to keep the country self-sufficient in electricity. Experts estimate that, without the new facilities, Serbia will have to start importing electricity as early as 2012. 
For that reason, the utility began selecting strategic partners for the construction of the Kolubara B thermal plant and a new block at the Nikola Tesla B thermal plant. The venture, worth almost 2 billion euros, will boast a capacity of about 1,400MW annually. 
The company will choose its partner by the end of this year, Energy Minister Petar Skundric said, adding Belgrade seeks completion of the plants in four or five years. 
 "The venture will directly involve 3,000 people and over 10,000 indirectly in the field of machine building," Skundric said. 
Power company representatives say 16 international companies have shown interest in working in Serbia so far. Belgrade media report that the most serious candidates include the Czech firm CEZ and Russian and Chinese companies. 
 In another effort to reduce energy dependence, the government investigated why the Banatski Dvor storage facility -- which can hold around 500 million cubic m of gas -- was unable to deliver any gas to Serbians during the January crisis. 
 As their countrymen endured freezing temperatures, Banatski Dvor workers found the facility's pumps to be inoperative. Investigators discovered Belgrade had failed to invest in the facility for more than 20 years. According to President Boris Tadic, the shortfall was the fault of the previous government. 
 Serbia needs 10 million cubic m of gas per day in winter and can produce just 1 million cubic m per day on its own. The facility's production capacity is only 400,000 cubic m per day. 
The estimated cost of modernising and filling the facility's storage tanks is 22m euros. 
"We have to learn certain lessons and have alternative heating systems," Tadic said. 
The government is now determined to revitalise Banatski Dvor and make it a regional gas storage facility. However, it is uncertain whether the necessary money is forthcoming, since it depends on Russia. 
Belgrade's hopes rely heavily on a contract with Russia's Gazprom, according to which the South Stream gas pipeline would traverse Serbia. As part of that deal, the Russian partner would invest in the reconstruction of Banatski Dvor. But plunging oil and gas revenues might affect Russia's willingness to do so. 
