30/12/2004
By Davor Konjukusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 30/12/04
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica on Wednesday (29 December) acknowledged that the issue of Belgrade's co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal would have a major influence on an EU decision to launch a feasibility study on Serbian accession, but continued to insist that his government favours the surrender of indictees. 
"You have seen in the past several months that two indictees have gone to The Hague voluntarily, and that one pointed to the importance of such a move, because several individuals cannot be responsible for holding an entire country hostage," Radio B92 quoted Kostunica as saying. 
When asked by reporters whether it has been decided who will be sent to The Hague by the end of January, Kostunica said the question was not discussed. However, he added, "This does not mean that we are not taking this question seriously." Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus recently said four ex-generals wanted by The Hague must be extradited by 27 January -- the day an EU delegation is scheduled to visit Belgrade. Their findings will help the EU member states to decide whether to invite Serbia-Montenegro to sign a Stability and Association Agreement. 
Kostunica has come under sharp criticism from the international community for obstructing co-operation with the tribunal. In early December, US Special Envoy for War Crimes Pierre-Richard Prosper said the prime minister is mainly to blame for Belgrade's lack of co-operation with the tribunal. Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte, meanwhile, told the BBC in an interview that Kostunica is reluctant to arrest the fugitive indictees because of the possible political fallout. 
"What I can say is that Kostunica, for political reasons, doesn't want to arrest the fugitives -- because he told me that personally in our last meeting," said del Ponte. Her report to the UN Security Council in November slammed Belgrade's failure to meet its international obligations. 
For his part, Kostunica continues to insist that his government is, in fact, co-operating. As examples, he cites the submission of documents and archives, the decision to free several dozen witnesses from the obligation of guarding state secrets, and "credible checks" on the reputed location of accused criminals. 
"Co-operation with The Hague is a must, but as with all other matters, some things can be achieved today, some tomorrow, and for some things more time is necessary. Progress, improvement, normalisation of relations with Europe and the world is not possible until we cast this ballast off our agenda, but it is simply impossible to do everything at once," Kostunica has said. 
Such comments have not been welcomed by The Hague. According to Alexandra Milenov, a representative of the tribunal secretariat, the forms of co-operation Kostunica mentions fall well short of meeting Serbia's obligations. 
