25/04/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 25/04/11 
Tomislav Nikolic is taking foods and liquids again, following an appeal from the church. Meanwhile, analysts are gauging the impact of his protest on Serbia's fractured political scene. 
The Serbian Progressive Party (SNS) leader began a hunger and thirst strike on April 16th, demanding the country hold early elections. Following the intervention of Patriarch Irinej, who told him this kind of protest was not in line with Serbian Orthodox beliefs, Nikolic drank water again on April 21st. 
Several days later, on Easter Sunday, he ended the hunger strike as well. 
The government sharply criticised Nikolic's actions, saying they undermined the country's stability and encouraged extreme behaviour. 
"Somebody who presents himself as the leader of the largest opposition party has to have responsibility," said Slobodan Homen, the government's media relations co-ordinator. "He should know that his actions could endanger the lives of citizens because he is sending the message that any demand can be achieved by sacrificing your own life." 
"Unfortunately, all of this is just a part of political marketing which sets a dangerous precedent and fosters an image of Serbia as an immature and unstable country," he added. 
Belgrade economist Milan Kovacevic, a foreign investment adviser, said that Nikolic's actions would have another damaging effect. "A factor in the investment climate is both political risk and instability, which is increasing because of Nikolic's strike and weakening the view that investing in Serbia is justified," said Kovacevic. 
SNS members, however, have rejected the criticism. "Who has Nikolic harmed apart from himself by risking his own life? We haven't broken a single piece of glass at our protests, let alone endangered the country's stability. This government, which is leading us towards economic collapse, is threatening Serbia's European perspective," Nebojsa Stefanovic, a member of the party presidency, told SETimes. 
Political analyst Dejan Vuk Stankovic believes that Serbia has managed to avoid radicalisation. But the already tense relations between the opposition and government are likely to deteriorate further, he said. 
"Citizens, despite their dissatisfaction with the standard of living, are not ready for more radical protests. However, we will now have the complete polarisation of the government and opposition," he told SETimes. 
"But I do not think that European integration will slow down as a result of that because the Serbian Progressive Party also wants Serbia to be granted EU candidate status," Stankovic added. 
He agreed that Nikolic's strike had the potential to push Serbian politics in a risky direction. "If [President Boris] Tadic had given in and called [snap] elections because of Nikolic's strike, that could have set a dangerous precedent," the analyst said. "And if Nikolic had gotten the elections, what would he have done tomorrow as prime minister, when dissatisfied workers go on a hunger strike or begin a more radical protest?" 
SNS member Stefanovic said his party is up to the challenge. "We are aware that the SNS would face many problems if it were to form a government," he said. "However, unlike this government, which doesn't want to speak to its people and its hungry workers, we would solve all of them through dialogue," he said. 
Serbia is due to hold regular general elections in the spring of 2012. A snap vote could bring big dividends for the SNS, which has commanded high levels of voter support for months, according to opinion polls. 
