16/09/2010
By Ljiljana Smiljanic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 16/09/10
On Tuesday (September 14th), Republika Srpska's (RS) parliament adopted a Law on State Property, which stipulates that the Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) entity will manage, secure and protect all forms of property within its territory. 
The law also declares that an entity government can use state property without compensation and give some property to municipalities. 
State-owned property was temporarily banned from use on the orders of the High Representative in 2005. 
The RS government proposed this law because the relevant commissions dealing with the division of state property in BiH have been unable to agree since, said Justice Minister Gerard Selman. 
As expected, Serb and Bosniak parliament members have opposing opinions. The Serbs argue RS has a right as an entity to control its property; Bosniaks argue the law violates the BiH Constitution as well as the Dayton Peace Accords. 
 "The Bosnian Constitution is clear about all property of the former Socialist Republic of BiH passing on to BiH. That [position] was confirmed by the country's highest judicial institutions. It is one of the foundations of the Dayton Peace Accords, just like the two-entity structure is," collective presidency member Haris Silajdzic said. 
RS officials say they respect BiH but can't ignore the fact the country consists of two entities that act on the state level. "BiH has international standing based on everything the entities have brought to it," Selman said. 
 The ambassadors of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) -- tasked with implementing the Dayton Peace Accords -- called the adoption of the law a unilateral act that "undermines the long-standing attempts to divide the state property so as to enable all levels of government to function". 
Similarly, High Representative Valentin Inzko characterised the latest move as a "testimony of the RS governing coalition's contradictory policy". 
The coalition demands the closing of the Office of the High Representative (OHR) but acts in a way that requires the Office's continual work, by threatening chances for reaching an agreement on the state property issue, Inzko said. 
Although the law's passage is still not finalised, Inzko said "the intent is clear" and "it represents an attempt to deflect attention from the real issues." He cites stopping the economic decline, boosting employment and returning BiH to the path of Euro-Atlantic integration. 
The OHR has previously warned that adopting the property measure solely in one of the two entities is against the law. 
 RS officials were quick to answer. Parliament Speaker Igor Radojicic argued that, with this law, RS is joining the search for a solution. He conceded that such important issues can't be resolved during an election campaign, but said there will be enough time for agreement after the October 3rd vote. 
Other Serbian MPs echo Radojicic's position, saying they have waited too long for an agreement and simply had to do something. 
A law on state property accepted among the RS, Federation of BiH and the Brcko District is the last of the "5+2" conditions set by the PIC to close the OHR. Until an agreement is reached and OHR is closed, BiH is not eligible to submit its application for EU membership candidacy or to activate the NATO-approved Membership Action Plan. 
