19/10/2010
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 19/10/10 
Terror threats are outside the scope of responsibilities for the European Forum for Disaster Risk Reduction (EFDRR), but recent radical groups' activities will be addressed in its programmes, Pande Lazarevski, Macedonia's national co-ordinator for disaster risk reduction said in an exclusive interview with SETimes. 
Macedonia took over the helm of the forum in early October, after it was recognised for its crisis management programme during the flooding of Lake Ohrid in February. 
 "Macedonia's national platform for reducing risk from natural and man-made catastrophes enjoys recognition internationally because of its unique conceptual solutions, and is justifiably taken as a point of reference worldwide," Lazarevski said. 
The Macedonian model employs a central command that co-ordinates emergency response through which government agencies, the private sector and academia work effectively and efficiently, he said. 
The programme's goal is to ensure an integrated approach to prevention, early warning, handling and overcoming the consequences of catastrophes, Lazarevski said. 
His team at the Centre for Managing Crisis in Skopje established the programme after conducting two years of research. 
 "In the 1990s, the civil defence system in Macedonia was completely marginalised, even let go," Skopje resident Bogdan Nestorovski, 46, told SETimes. "Finally, a new opportunity has emerged to create a secure society and to teach current and future generations how to behave in time of crisis." 
The Macedonian model is based on the US Homeland Security one, Lazarevski explained. The United States assisted and advised Macedonia in developing the programme, which was implemented last year. Macedonia's programme uses the US Incident Command System concept to manage emergencies, as well as the US Emergency Operations System mechanism to ensure local, state and federal communications. 
"It represents a serious contribution to the global efforts to build a more resistant and secure world," National Platform's Consultative Council President Georgi Efremov said. "It is an integrating tool which guarantees synergy for all participants." 
Emergency preparedness programmes are exceptionally important in the Balkans given the high likelihood of emerging crisis; the flooding in Slovenia and Croatia last month and the current toxic sludge contamination spreading from Hungary are the latest examples, Efremov said. 
Macedonia will focus its forum chairmanship on systematically supporting other countries to prepare national platforms, Lazarevski said. Efforts will be directed to prepare for and adapt to climate changes. Particular attention will be given to secure cities, hospitals and schools. 
Macedonia became the 11th European country to develop a crisis management strategy. Bulgaria and Croatia have crisis programmes as well and Turkey says it too plans to implement one. 
