11/08/2010
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 11/08/10 
Although campaigning for Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) October elections has not yet officially begun, authorities in Republika Srpska are already cooking up a hot potato for voters. . They are expected to promote the theme that Serbs are vulnerable in BiH and may one day have to split from the country. 
Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, leader of the ruling Union of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), is reviving the pro-independence rhetoric that won him both the 2006 elections and an absolute majority in parliament. 
Spurring him, analysts say, is the recent International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruling on Kosovo. On July 22nd, the court said Pristina's unilateral declaration of sovereignty did not violate international law. 
The Bosnian Serb leader denies he is advocating a split, but says one could eventually come about. 
"The agenda is not secession of the RS, but a struggle for status," he says. "Of course, that struggle could evolve and at some point lead us to a place where everyone understands that BiH is not viable as a country." 
Dodik and his party have already pushed through a law authorising a referendum on independence. It took effect on April 20th. 
Sarajevo University Political Science Professor Sacir Filandra believes the ICJ's ruling has shifted the debate . "In the coming years, from the perspective of an imaginary Serbian nationalist bloc, certain actions towards RS can be expected, calculated to compensate for the loss of Kosovo," Filandra explained. 
For that reason, he said, BiH should tread carefully when it comes to its own relationship with Pristina. 
 "I believe that the initiatives within Bosnia to recognise Kosovo would be counterproductive. At this point the national question is not important for Bosnians and Croats in BiH, and its being brought to the fore would only exacerbate and complicate the internal situation in the country and the region," he said. 
 Faculty of Philosophy Banja Luka Professor Miodrag Zivanovic says any bid for seccession would be self-destructive. 
"It would mean that people of RS would find themselves living under sanctions again, and that in this case, the Serbs would be brutally and forcibly returned to BiH," Zivanovic said. 
Filandra and he agree that Belgrade has a strong influence on the Bosnian Serb leadership. 
Zivanovic believes Belgrade's sway over Banja Luka must be curtailed, "because Serbia and Bosnia are two countries that should have their own policies". Filandra, however, sees both a "bad and a good side" to the relationship. 
"The bad side is that Belgrade is using RS. The good side is the fact that politicians in RS are not independent when it comes to national strategic decisions. Belgrade is a far more serious and realistic international legal actor, which, for Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entire region, is a better thing," Filandra said. 
