21/03/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 21/03/05
George Dumitrescu owns a three-room apartment in a typical communist-era apartment block in Bucharest -- eight floors with six flats each, dark hallways, a scary elevator, an inefficient heating system and small rooms. The young software specialist bought his home in 2000 for the equivalent of 9,400 euros. Now he is thinking about selling it. 
On the current market, the 65 square metre flat could sell for about 55,000 euros. "I'm more and more tempted to sell it and to buy a plot in the outskirts. I believe the money will be just enough for 500 square metres of land at 15-20 euros per square metre and for building a three-bedroom house," Dumitrescu said. 
Strange but true: in Bucharest and other large Romanian cities, prices for the uncomfortable apartments built between 1950 and 1990 have skyrocketed, reaching as much as 1,000 euros per square metre. At the same time, building a house for immediate possession costs 300 to 500 euros per square metre. 
 "This paradoxical situation has no justification, is artificial and has no correspondence in economical reality", the daily Jurnalul National quoted Romanian Association of Real Estate Agencies president Liviu Ureche as saying. Others, however, see valid reasons for the price hikes. As of last year, the Romanian economy grew by more than 8 per cent, and banks continued to be open to credit requests. 
Local people interested in buying a flat or a house have had to compete with foreign investors -- especially Romanians now living abroad -- who want to place their savings in an area where the yearly gains could reach 100 per cent. 
"Another impulse to increase the prices was given to apartments' owners by the national currency rate fluctuations and by the future introduction of the new Romanian leu," the president of the Real Estate National Association, Gabriel Zamfir, told the weekly Capital. 
The same spectacular trends have been seen in the land market, where prices rose 20 per cent to 100 per cent in the last year, especially on the outskirts of Bucharest and other large to medium-sized cities and towns. The areas are seeing an influx of interested buyers as downtown locations become less and less available or sell for prohibitive sums. 
Experts are divided when it comes to the prognosis. "We have signals that flat prices will continue to go up 5 per cent to 15 per cent, followed by a crash of 30 per cent to 50 per cent," said Marius Locic, president of Locic Imobiliare. Real estate analyst Radu Zilisteanu, meanwhile, believes psychological factors will keep prices afloat at least until Romania's scheduled entry into the EU on 1 January 2007, and possibly even beyond. "Only building new flats at smaller prices could calm down the market," he said. 
