18/12/2009
By Galia Ivanova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 18/12/09
Communism had already collapsed in Poland and Hungary and pro-democracy protests were gathering pace in Czechoslovakia as the Berlin Wall came down on November 9th 1989. A day later, Todor Zhivkov, leader of the Bulgarian Communist Party (BCP) and the longest-serving authoritarian ruler in any of the countries in the Soviet-bloc, was toppled in an internal coup orchestrated by members of his party. 
The main figures behind the plot against the 78-year-old dictator -- his foreign minister Petar Mladenov and foreign trade minister Andrey Lukanov, a reformist technocrat -- then took the top posts in the country. 
Zhivkov had turned Bulgaria into the most obedient ally of the former Soviet Union during his 33-year-long reign. The overthrowing of the BCP leader set the stage for democratic change, and marked the beginning of the country's transition to a market economy. 
Shortly after Zhivkov's removal, the country was hit by food shortages, as the economy began deteriorating rapidly. Bulgarians had to line up in front of shops hours before dawn just to be able to secure milk, yogurt, meat or other staples for their families. 
 "I don't miss the communist times and all the restrictions on personal freedoms. I feel free now as I can openly speak my mind without any fear," one Sofia resident, 58, told SETimes. 
There have been trade-offs, however. "It's easy to do business now," a 57-old Sofia-based architect said. "But all the social gains we enjoyed in the past are gone." 
In late 1996, the government failed to secure a new credit agreement with the IMF and the country's credit rating fell. 
 More than half of Bulgaria's commercial banks went bankrupt. Hundreds of thousands of people lost their savings. The country was hit by spiraling hyperinflation. 
The economic and financial crisis triggered massive anti-government Union of Democratic Forces (UDF)-led protests and a general strike in early 1997. The May 1997 elections were won by the UDF and Ivan Kostov, leader of the former coalition-turned-party, was appointed prime minister. 
 Kostov is credited with restoring financial stability, implementing long-delayed economic reforms and the privatisation of hundreds of state-owned enterprises, as well as Bulgaria's speedy progress into the EU and NATO. 
However, over a million people have left Bulgaria in the past two decades. 
“Everything in Bulgaria looks fine formally: the free market, human rights, free speech, the multiparty political system, membership in the EU and NATO,” the New York Times quoted Edvin Sugarev, a poet and former senior UDF member, as saying. "But that's only a facade." 
"People got their freedom, but they don't know what to do with it," he added. 
