12/10/2005
(AP, FENA - 11/10/05; Xinhua - 08/10/05; US Department of State - 07/10/05)
A senior US diplomat has warned that his country will block the efforts of countries involved in the Balkan conflicts in the early 1990s to build closer ties with NATO until they hand over war crimes indictees to the UN tribunal in The Hague. 
"NATO has to hold this line on these war criminals," Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs Nicholas Burns said in Brussels on Tuesday (11 October). "We can't forget and we cannot let these war criminals off the hook." 
Nearly ten years after the end of conflicts in Croatia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), seven war crimes suspects wanted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) remain at large. Among them are the three most wanted -- former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic, his military commander, Ratko Mladic and retired Croatian General Ante Gotovina. 
Croatia is hoping to join NATO, while Serbia-Montenegro and BiH are still seeking admission in the Alliance's Partnership for Peace (PfP) programme. 
"The message is very clear, Croatia will not become a member of NATO until [Gotovina] is arrested and sent to The Hague, and Serbia will not become a member of PfP until Mladic is," the AP quoted Burns as saying. "We're going to have to judge the authorities in Belgrade especially, as well as the authorities in [the capital of BiH's Republika Srpska] Banja Luka, by their actions, because their words have just not amounted to much." 
Burns' remarks preceded his visit to Sarajevo on Wednesday, the first stop on his three-day Balkan tour. He is scheduled to travel to Pristina and Belgrade before winding up his trip on Friday. 
During a press briefing in Washington last week, Burns described the US administration as "severely disappointed" that Serbian authorities failed to arrest Mladic before the 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre on 11 July of this year. During June talks with officials in Belgrade, the US diplomat said he had been left with the impression that the arrest "was imminent". 
"We will have a very tough-minded view of this," Burns told reporters in Washington. "Someone has to stand up for the people, for the families of the victims of ten years ago, and we cannot forget what happened at Srebrenica. We won't forget it and they will not be coming into NATO until these actions are taken." 
While the United States resumed foreign assistance to Serbia in June following the transfer of a number of indictees to the ICTY during the first six months of the year, Burns warned that aid again could be suspended. 
"It's a lack of political will on the part of the Belgrade authorities," Burns said Friday. "It does not stand to reason that these people cannot be found." 
During his visit to Sarajevo on Wednesday, he is expected to address the issue of police reform in BiH, a key final condition for launching talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU. Negotiations to determine Kosovo's final status, which are expected to begin within the coming weeks, will be a key topic in talks between Burns and officials in Pristina and Belgrade. 
