09/03/2009
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 09/03/09
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's visit to Ankara on Saturday (March 7th) signalled a new era in US-Turkish relations. 
 "Turkey is a friend for all times and all challenges," Clinton said after her talks with Turkish counterpart Ali Babacan. "I know that President [Barack] Obama and I will work with you ... to strengthen and deepen those ties." 
In recent years, Washington and Ankara disagreed over Middle East policy and the Iraq war. Turkish warmth towards the United States cooled significantly. 
 However, Turkish expectations of closer co-operation, peace and stability in the region are running high. Clinton announced on Saturday that Obama will visit Turkey in April. "I will tell President Obama that he will find a warm welcome," Clinton said. 
A visit by Obama so early in his presidency would be a source of pride for Turks, who think Washington is beginning again to acknowledge their country's strategic importance. 
 Unity against common challenges 
During Clinton's visit, she and Babacan issued a joint statement reaffirming their countries' strategic partnership and shared pursuit of peace, democracy and freedom. 
Their statement covered a wide range of issues, such as the Middle East and the fight against terrorism, particularly against the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) and al-Qaeda, which the statement called "common enemies". Washington pledged to continue its intelligence support for Turkish operations against the PKK. 
The joint statement emphasised the continuation of co-operation in the Balkans as well as support of a settlement of the Cyprus question. 
 Support for Turkey's EU membership 
Washington underlined its strong support for Turkey's accession to the EU and of the country's ongoing reform process. 
Ankara and Washington also pledged "continued co-operation in Afghanistan", including through "continued Turkish contributions to Afghanistan". 
The two allies expressed their commitment to Iraq's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Washington praised Ankara's "deepening relations with" Baghdad. 
Asked by a reporter whether the United States would seek to withdraw its troops from Iraq through Turkish territory, Clinton refused provide into specifics. "We will consult with and seek advice from a NATO ally like Turkey about the safest and most effective means of withdrawing our troops," she said. 
 Clinton's outreach to the people 
Apart from tough diplomatic issues, Clinton reached out to the Turkish people. She appeared on a popular talk show called "Haydi Gel Bizimle Ol" ("Come and Join Us".) 
On this programme, which often discusses problems faced by women in a society where traditional values and religion play a major role, a co-hostess asked Clinton whether Turkey was becoming a "moderate Islamist republic" under Justice and Development Party (AKP) rule. 
"Turkey has been an extraordinary example [of] the coexistence of democracy, modernity, secularism and Islam," answered Clinton. She pronounced herself "optimistic" about Turkey's future and the US-Turkish partnership. 
