17/09/2011
(Reuters, Euronews - 16/09/11; AFP, Reuters, AP, FT, Washington Post, The Telegraph, BBC, Euobserver, Euronews, Economic Times, VOA, RFE/RL, IMF, EC - 15/09/11; World Banka - 14/09/11)
IMF head Christine Lagarde urged the world's advanced economies on Thursday (September 15th) to act decisively to avoid renewed recession that would affect not only countries on both sides of the Atlantic, but across the globe. 
The economic crisis in developed nations has entered a "dangerous new phase", exacerbated by weak political leadership, the former French finance minister warned in her first major address since taking office in July. 
"Exactly three years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the economic skies look troubled and turbulent as global activity slows and downside risks increase," Lagarde said in a speech at the Woodrow Wilson Center in Washington. 
The lingering sovereign debt crisis in the Eurozone that is eating away growth, the threat of instability in the core of the global economic system and social tensions are the three main challenges facing the world economy today, she said. 
"Without collective, bold action, there is a real risk that the major economies slip back instead of moving forward," she stressed, warning that the path to recovery is now "much narrower than before, and is getting narrower". 
Meanwhile, uncertainty about sovereign debt sustainability in the euro area continues to undermine confidence and European banks need adequate capital buffers to support growth, according to Lagarde. 
"Weak growth and weak balance sheets -- of governments, financial institutions, and households -- are feeding negatively on each other, fuelling a crisis of confidence and holding back demand, investment, and job creation." 
"This vicious cycle is gaining momentum," she warned, noting that policy makers' hesitant moves and political dysfunction have allowed things to get worse. 
In today's globalised world, no one would escape unscathed in the event of renewed recession in the advanced economies. Developing countries would be hit hard and emerging markets would not be spared, either, despite the brighter growth picture there, according to the French financier. 
Her comments echoed a similar warning issued on Wednesday by World Bank President Robert Zoellick, who sternly criticised advanced economies for failing to take the needed tough measures to address the current challenges. 
"Europe, Japan and the United States must be responsible stakeholders, too. They have procrastinated for too long on taking the difficult decisions, narrowing what choices are now left to a painful few," he said in a speech at George Washington University. 
"The global economy has entered a new danger zone with little running room as European countries resist difficult truths about the common responsibilities of a common currency," Zoellick added. 
The European Commission (EC) issued a report on Thursday, saying that economic growth across the 27-nation would come to a "virtual standstill" by the end of this year as a result of the Eurozone debt crisis. 
"Recoveries from financial crises are often slow and bumpy. Moreover, the EU economy is affected by a more difficult external environment, while domestic demand remains subdued," EU Economic Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn said at a news conference in Brussels. 
"The sovereign debt crisis has worsened, and the financial market turmoil is set to dampen the real economy." 
