31/10/2005
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 31/10/05
The time has come for the state-owned Serbian Oil Industry (NIS) to find a new, private owner. Austria's OMV, Hungary's MOL, Greece's Hellenic Petroleum, and above all, Russian giant Lukoil, are knocking at the door, while the Serbian public is hoping for Shell or BP. The question of who will reel in the last closed oil market in Europe will remain unanswered until the beginning of next year. At that time, the privatisation method will be put forth by a privatisation advisor, who will be chosen in a tender which is currently under way. 
NIS is made up of ten subsidiaries which cover everything from research and prospecting for oil and gas, to refining and distribution at 500 gas stations. The company has its own sources in Serbia and concessions in Angola. It employs over 17,000 workers. As of 2004, its business assets amounted to around 2.2 billion euros, with 30m euros in realised profits. That figure only amounts to a third of what could have been achieved, had the government not intervened in the market and lowered the price of derivatives. 
Certainly this behemoth represents a significant privatisation morsel for the Serbian government, which has been under IMF pressure to put it on the market. The government was faced with a choice -- either find a buyer for two refineries, or turn its back on the 579m-euro debt write-off from the Paris Club of creditors. 
A storm of public opinion surrounds the sale of the company, which was created in mid-1991 through the forced conglomeration and nationalisation of the ten separate state companies that formerly operated in the oil and gas industry in Serbia. For nearly ten years, NIS served as the largest financial support for Slobodan Milosevic's regime -- a veritable money mint. Even today, one fifth of the state budget comes solely from this company. 
There are no gas imports in Serbia. Under a 2001 government decree, it is only possible to fill up with gasoline that has been refined in Serbia, and at a price dictated by the government. Recently, these conditions have been loosened slightly, but only for lead-free gasoline and euro-diesel products that Serbia's outdated refineries cannot produce in sufficient quantities. 
If the refineries in Panchevo and Novi Sad were modernised, with their current annual capacity of 6.5 million tones, they could supply half of the Balkan market. Panchevo is located on the Danube, and that the planned Constanca-Trieste gas pipeline passes through the refinery. The project to build a superhighway to transport "black gold" from the Caspian Sea to the heart of Europe has brought together the governments of Romania, Serbia, Croatia, Slovenia, Italy and Austria. It is largely for this reason that a heated battle is being waged over NIS. The government is under external pressure for a new owner to be found as soon as possible, while company management is demanding a pre-privatisation credit and "first modernization then sale". 
A 1 billion euro investment in modernisation would potentially yield five times that amount at the moment of sale, NIS Board of Directors President Zeljko Popovich says. Nevertheless, it appears that the energetic battle of the managers who have "protected" NIS for five years is slowly coming to a close. "The state is not there to do business, but to create conditions for businessmen to do business," Zorana Mihajlovich-Milanovich, advisor to Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, said. 
 A middle course -- modernisation and privatisation -- is advocated by by Bozidar Djelich, a banker, former finance minister and founder of the Altis consulting company. He points to the example of the Croatian INE, 25 per cent of which was sold to MOL in 2003 for 417.4m euros, with the sale of a further 15 per cent currently under way. Croatia passed a separate law for privatising its economic wunderkind, under which all government decisions on the company have to be adopted by parliament. The contract is very strict -- no workers will be fired for three years, and the new owner cannot close the refineries in Rijeka and Sisak. The new owner will only be able to collect dividends in the fourth year of operation, and only up to one quarter of realised profits. 
Even more applicable, from a Serbian perspective, is the case of Romania's Petrom. OMV paid 1.5 billion euros last year for a 51 per cent share. As part of the deal, the Austrians committed themselves to maintaining an integrated oil and natural gas company, as well as to a specified level of production. The company business plan continues to be approved every year by the Romanian government, which also has deciding power over the number of employees working for the company. 
