14/06/2011
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 14/06/11
Reactions in Romania do not seem to be subsiding after the June 1st opening of a Szekler Land representatives' office in Brussels. The move was taken at the initiative of three Romanian EU parliamentarians of ethnic Hungarian origin. 
The government has called on EU institutions not to provide legitimacy to the office, arguing that Szekler Land is not a recognised administrative unit. President Traian Basescu condemned the office as a "poor choice" and "a sign of disrespect for both the Constitution and Romanians". 
Szekler Land is a region in central Romania which consists of two counties -- Covasna and Harghita -- in which ethnic Hungarians form a majority. It also encompasses part of the adjacent Mures County, whose population includes a sizable number of Hungarians. 
"Through this office, the Szekler Land joins the hundreds of provinces, regions, counties and European towns that are represented through own representations in the EU's capital. The common office embodies the cohesion of the three counties' inhabitants and paves the way to common economic development and tourism projects, cultural exchanges and other aspects of the socio-cultural life," the three EU parliamentarians said in a press release. 
One of them is Laszlo Tokes, vice-president of the European Parliament, who also runs the Hungarian National Council of Transylvania (CNMT). Its stated goal is territorial autonomy for Szekler Land. 
The presence of Hungarian Deputy Prime Minister Zsolt Semjen at the reception marking the office's opening struck a nerve. Romania's foreign affairs ministry immediately summoned the Hungarian ambassador to explain Semjen's presence. 
Romanian analysts tried to put the development in context. 
"The EU rejects the concept of autonomy on ethnic grounds. What the Laszlo Tokes lobby is doing in Brussels for the Szekler Land will have no political consequence. This is why no European Parliament official participated in the opening reception," Evenimentul Zilei senior political editor Silviu Sergiu told SETimes. 
Sergiu said Tokes' campaign is for domestic political use to promote the more radical Magyar People's Party in Transylvania. 
"But the revisionist approach could harm the moderate Magyar politicians and their performance in next year's elections," Sergiu said, referring to the Hungarians' Democratic Union (UDMR) which is a member of Romania's tripartite ruling coalition. 
CNMT however, has defended the idea of opening a diplomatic mission. 
"We find this whole political scandal unnatural and worrying because what we did there was a normal initiative since hundreds of European regions are represented in the communitarian capital where they do political and economic lobbying. The representation will serve as a means to increase the welfare of the region," CNMT Executive President Toro Tibor told SETimes. 
"The Magyar card has and continues to be used as a pretext in the fights between the government and the opposition in Romania," Tibor added. 
"Autonomy is a very important goal of the Magyar community in Romania and elsewhere, and it seems normal to us to get support from Hungary. We believe this objective of ours, territorial autonomy, will contribute to the normalisation of relations between the majority and minority. And yes, our representation in Brussels will be used to promote our goal of territorial autonomy," he concluded. 
