09/05/2006
(FT, The Guardian, EUobserver, Bucharest Daily News, Dnevnik.bg - 09/05/06; AFP, AP, EUexpands - 08/05/06)
Bulgaria and Romania might have to wait until autumn for confirmation of their EU accession date, officials in Brussels suggested on Monday (8 May). According to the British daily Financial Times, European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso has decided to delay the decision by up to five months, to assess whether the two countries are serious about meeting their commitments. 
Under the accession treaty signed with the EU in April 2005, the two Balkan countries are scheduled to join the Union on 1 January 2007. But the agreement also allows the 25-nation bloc to postpone their entry by one year if shortcomings are found in key areas. 
Less than eight months before their planned admission, the EC is preparing to release reports on Bulgaria and Romania's readiness for membership. The 16 May reports were expected to recommend whether accession should proceed on schedule or be delayed. 
Based on the EC's recommendations, EU leaders meeting for a summit in June were then to make a final decision on the two countries' accession. 
But EU Enlargement Commission spokeswoman Krisztina Nagy now says no decision has been taken. "All options are on the table. The jury is still out," she added. 
Romania, which was previously viewed as lagging behind Bulgaria in its preparedness for membership, has been praised in recent months for its progress in fulfilling the EU requirements. 
Bulgaria, on the other hand, has come under mounting pressure to step up efforts in implementing judicial reforms and in fighting organised crime and corruption, particularly among high-level officials. About 150 people, including a top banker and a leading customs official, have become the victims of contract killings in the country since 2001, with no convictions to date. 
Speculation has also mounted that the accession bids of the two countries could be decoupled, with the EC recommending membership for Romania in 2007 and for Bulgaria a year later. Alternatively, Bulgaria could be allowed to join the Union in 2007, but with a safeguard clause for justice and home affairs in force. 
If the EU decides to postpone Bulgaria's entry or to impose special conditions "it would send a signal that the changes that have been made are not appreciated," Bulgarian Chief Prosecutor Boris Velchev said on Monday. Taken as a whole, the Bulgarian judicial system is not corrupt, he stressed, admitting however "there are a number of corrupt magistrates." 
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev urged the EU on Monday not to postpone Bulgaria's entry. 
"A postponement would be perceived as a rejection," the AP quoted him as saying. "It would be a mistake; we are not second class European citizens. Do not try to humiliate us." 
Noting the "painful" reforms his country has under taken, Stanishev also cautioned that a move to put off Bulgaria's entry until 2008 would "bring about disappointment in public opinion," while encouraging political parties and companies opposing EU standards and rules. "It will assist those in Bulgaria who are against accession," the prime minister said. 
