26/11/2004
(Southeast Europe Online - 26/11/04; European Commission, RFE/RL, BBC, HINA - 25/11/04; British Foreign and Commonwealth Office - 24/11/04)
The European Commission (EC) is disappointed with Croatia's co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), new EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn told officials in Zagreb on Thursday (25 November). The authorities, he added, must make every effort to improve relations with The Hague-based court before next month's EU summit. 
"We encourage and urge the government to do its utmost by mid-December to remedy this state of affairs and ensure full co-operation with the tribunal," Rehn said following talks with Croatian Foreign Minister Miomir Zuzul. 
Croatia, which became an official EU candidate in June, expects to be given a date for starting membership talks with the Union during the two-day summit in Copenhagen on 16 December. While Croatia has received good scores for its economic and political reform efforts, full co-operation with the ICTY remains a key precondition for progress on the road to the EU, Rehn said. 
The official visit to Zagreb was Rehn's first since he assumed his post on Monday. On Tuesday, UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte told the UN Security Council that the arrest and handover of fugitive Croat General Ante Gotovina is the only obstacle to Croatia's full co-operation with the ICTY. 
Gotovina, who along with wartime Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, tops the UN tribunal's list of most wanted indictees, was indicted in June 2001. The ICTY holds him responsible for atrocities committed during the 1991-1995 conflict in Croatia. Gotovina disappeared soon after Croatian authorities informed him that there was a sealed indictment against him. 
Voicing doubt about the efficiency of measures the Croatian authorities have taken to arrest the fugitive, del Ponte said Tuesday there were strong indications that "a well-organised support network, including within state structures" was helping him evade justice. 
"As soon as Gotovina will be in The Hague, it will be possible to say that, indeed, Croatia is co-operating fully with the tribunal," the UN prosecutor said. "Until Gotovina is located, be it inside or outside of Croatia, and transferred, it will mean that the networks protecting war criminals are more powerful than this part of the government that genuinely wants to co-operate fully with the tribunal," she added, urging the international community to continue pressing Zagreb to capture the fugitive. 
Following del Ponte's report, British Minister for Europe Denis MacShane warned Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro that their continued failure to meet their obligations to the ICTY would "clearly have implications" on their prospects for joining Euro-Atlantic structures. 

