28/06/2011
(Washington Post, The Boston Globe - 28/06/11; US State Department, CNN, VOA - 27/06/11)
Macedonia made strong efforts to combat human trafficking last year, the US State Department said in a report published on Monday (June 27th), placing the Balkan nation back among the world's best performers in this area. 
"The government made significant strides in its law enforcement efforts to combat trafficking by convicting an increased number of trafficking offenders and prosecuting and convicting an official for trafficking complicity in 2010," it said in its 2011 Trafficking in Persons (TIP) report. 
Furthermore, the number of trafficking victims identified by Macedonian authorities also increased last year, when a new shelter for domestic trafficking victims opened. 
Macedonia, which is a source, destination, and transit country for men, women, and children for sex trafficking and forced labour, "fully complies with the minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking", the State Department concluded. 
It noted, however, that Skopje still needs to improve its approach towards the victims of that type of crime, as well as its procedures for identifying cases of trafficking. 
"Accurate identification of trafficking cases and conflation of human trafficking with other criminal activities continued to be problems, raising the risk that unidentified trafficking victims could face continued exploitation or deportation, and not benefit from assistance," the report said. 
The 11th annual edition of the TIP report assesses the anti-trafficking efforts that 184 countries and territories made in 2010 and ranks them in one of four categories, or tiers. 
Those found to be fully complying with the minimum international standards for the elimination of trafficking are ranked in Tier 1, which comprises 32 countries this year. The only Southeast European (SEE) ones in this group are Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Macedonia, which was first placed in that category in 2008, but dropped out of it last year. 
Nine other countries from the region -- Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Kosovo, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia and Turkey -- are ranked in the 85-strong Tier 2. That group includes those nations that do not fully comply with minimum standards for the elimination of trafficking, but are making significant efforts to do so. 
Cyprus is the only SEE country from the region to be placed on the State Department's Tier 2 Watch List this year. 
Despite its efforts to fully comply with the minimum international standards, the government "failed to demonstrate evidence of increasing efforts to address human trafficking over the previous reporting period; therefore, Cyprus is placed on Tier 2 Watch List," it explained. 
Other reasons for that move included the Cypriot authorities' failure "to vigorously prosecute or convict trafficking offenders", as well as the fact that "very few prosecutions resulted in traffickers being held accountable in 2010." Another problem was that they failed "to convict or sentence any officials complicit in trafficking in Cyprus". 
