01/05/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 01/05/09
The daunting durability of interethnic distrust in Kosovo has not stopped some local leaders from assembling to discuss it. Under the auspices of the US-based NGO Project on Ethnic Relations (PER), Kosovo's Albanian and Serb political leaders convened on April 22nd at an invitation-only round table in Pristina, joined by international representatives. 
Co-chairing the forum were Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and PER President Livia Plaks. Thaci assured the audience that Kosovo had made great progress in improving interethnic relations. 
He cited, as concrete examples of the government's positive attitude, efforts to build houses, roads and schools in Serb-majority areas and decentralisation of government. 
Pristina is offering new houses to 29 needy Serb families living in Novo Brdo. "I call on all communities in Kosovo ... to participate in future local elections and to take their place in Kosovo's institutions and society," Thaci appealed. 
 Plaks said in her opening remarks that improving inter-ethnic relations in the region was eminently possible but required co-operation. "There is still a major lack of trust between the communities," she warned, emphasising the "air should be cleansed" in their relations. 
Hostility to the writ of Pristina remains deep in Serb-dominated northern Kosovo. Earlier this spring, Radenko Nedeljkovic, president of the Kosovska Mitrovica district, assessed the situation in some Serb-majority areas as "true humanitarian catastrophe". He alleged the government was shutting off electricity to communities, confiscating Serbian documents and pursuing other forms of official harassment. 
Many Kosovo Albanians, meanwhile, see the Serbs as taking directions from Belgrade in a concerted effort to undermine independence. 
PER is doing what it can to ease the mutual suspicion. It has conducted round tables also in Novo Brdo and Strpce as well in an effort to enhance relations. 
Founded in 1991, PER seeks to prevent "ethnic conflict in Central and Eastern Europe, the Balkans and the former Soviet Union". Among its sponsors are USAID, the British government and the Swiss government. 
