12/11/2004
(Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik, bTV - 11/11/04; OSCE; Bulgarian Parliament; Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs)
Trafficking in humans, drugs and arms are among the most serious problems currently facing Southeast Europe, Stability Pact Co-ordinator Erhard Busek said Thursday (11 November) at the opening of a two-day international forum on the regional fight against organised crime. Calling for greater co-operation and sharing of information, he said parliaments should seek to ensure that police forces in the Balkans can work together effectively. 
Nearly 100,000 women and children in the region are affected by human trafficking every year, Busek said, while cigarette smuggling costs the EU an estimated 10 billion euros annually in uncollected tax revenues. 
Discussing Bulgaria in particular, Busek urged the country to proceed with judicial reforms and boost the speed and efficiency of trial proceedings. 
 Bulgarian Foreign Minister and current OSCE Chairman-in-Office Solomon Passy hailed the forum as an opportunity for lawmakers dealing with justice and home affairs to share experience with experts from regional, European and other international organisations. 
 "Combating international crime is a major challenge in every European state," said Passy, describing it as a key priority on his country's agenda. 
During Thursday's sessions, forum participants focused on legislative issues, international co-operation, and anti-corruption efforts. Friday's agenda includes working group sessions on specific issues, including human trafficking. 
Organised crime groups are in a position to undermine good governance through bribes and other forms of corruption, Bulgarian Parliament Speaker Ognian Gerdzhikov told participants. However, he added, such groups are not strong enough to threaten the country's economic and financial stability. 
The Bulgarian Parliament has taken a number of steps to address the problem, Gerdzhikov said, including bringing penalties into line with EU norms, improving interaction between agencies involved in the fight against organised crime, and enhancing Bulgaria's participation in international efforts. 
Members of the national parliaments of SEE countries, representatives of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) and the European Parliament are participating in the forum, which was organised by the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly under the auspices of the Parliamentary Troika on the Stability Pact. The Troika consists of PACE, the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly and the European Parliament. 
