11/10/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 11/10/10
Despite a good yield from the 2010 tourist season revenue, Croatia still faces a 2 billion euro budget deficit, prompting speculation about IMF intervention. 
"The IMF did not initiate any talks with Croatia, but if the call comes from Zagreb, the IMF will enter talks," a spokesperson for the Fund, Simonetta Nardin, told the Croatian weekly Globus. 
The IMF still maintains a strict policy that impacts a country's social and welfare policies. It usually recommends freezing wages and pensions, cutting public spending and improving financial discipline. 
 In light of the global recession, however, it has sought to improve the conditions for financial assistance and make itself an attractive business partner for governments struggling with economic woes. 
Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor has so far rejected any notion of the IMF getting involved. She says such talk is just being driven by the coming parliamentary elections. 
"Croatia will handle the crisis on its own. [...] There is no need for the IMF, and the government has not considered it," she said. 
 Kosor has the support of Finance Minister Ivan Suker, who fiercely opposes the IMF's involvement in Croatia's economy. The opposition and President Ivo Josipovic disagree, saying the Fund could be a last resort solution. 
"The IMF is not a bogey," Josipovic said. 
Some economists argue that if Croatia cannot solve the budget deficit, it would be better off seeking help rather than risk a growing deficit and a deepening crisis. 
 University of Zagreb Professor Luka Brkic likens the situation to Odysseus meeting the mermaids; to resist the temptation, Odysseus needed to tie himself. 
"If we want to overcome the crisis, we need to tie ourselves [to the IMF] to avoid any irrational decisions," Brkic told SETimes. If the country cannot rein in spending, "then there is always a chance to call someone who would do that for you, and that is the IMF". 
 Brkic doubts the government will be able to overcome the crisis on its own, without the IMF's involvement. "Still, there is no need for controversy over it, and I agree that IMF is not a bogey," Brkic said. 
The IMF issued a report on the state of the Croatian economy last June. The Fund's Executive Director for Europe, Age Bakker, explained that the global economic crisis significantly affected the economy. 
"With a reduced capital influx, subdued export demand externally, and tight credit conditions domestically, real GDP fell by 5.8% in 2009, and unemployment rose sharply to 17%. The economy remained in the midst of a severe downturn in the early part of 2010, and positive growth is gradually expected in the second half of the year, with a forecast for zero growth in 2010," said Bakker. 
