01/07/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 01/07/05
Albania's political parties wrapped up an intense electoral campaign Friday (1 July) as the country prepared to go to the polls Sunday to choose a new parliament. It will be the sixth time since the fall of communism that parliamentary elections have been held. 
The process is considered vital for the future of Albania. The international community has repeatedly signalled that it considers the election a benchmark of progress in democratisation, urging authorities and political parties to ensure a free and fair vote in line with international standards.
"The way Albania is going to organise the elections in accordance with international standards is very important for the integration process of the country in Euro-Atlantic structures," said US Ambassador to Tirana Marcie Ries, emphasising that her government does not back any particular political party, but rather supports a fair election process. 
A similar message came from EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana. "The elections will make clear if the democratic system in Albania has reached the level which will allow the country to go on with the integration process," he said in a statement. 
The most recent polls suggest the opposition Democratic Party (DP), headed by former President Sali Berisha, leads with about 35 per cent of voter support. But the current ruling Socialist Party, led by Prime Minister Fatos Nano, trails by just 1 per cent -- well within the margin of error. Former Prime Minister and ex-SP member Ilir Meta's Socialist Movement for Integration is in third place, followed by the Movement for National Development, led by Leka Zogu. 
The SP has focused its campaign on 1997, the year pyramid schemes devastated the Albanian economy and cost thousands their life savings. DP was the party in power at the time. The DP, meanwhile, has accused the ruling party of corruption and the prime minister of links to organised crime. 
The Socialists and their allies have ruled Albania for eight years, but the party has split with the departure of Meta. While Berisha's DP reached a co-operation agreement with former party member Genc Pollo -- who now heads a new grouping known as the New Democratic Party -- neither the SP nor the DP has been able to make such a deal with Meta. 
The international community is paying close attention to the election. 
Television, radio and the print media have been airing ads from candidates and parties, while special shows were broadcast to help the public learn more about their choices. The Central Election Commission (CEC) also established a free telephone line providing information on voting procedures. 
Voters' lists have been a hot issue in past elections, and authorities have been working to make sure this does not happen again. For the first time, the lists can be found online on the Internet. 
Police, meanwhile, are taking precautions aimed at avoiding any possible incidents that might mar the voting process. Nearly 4,700 officers will be on duty Sunday, according to the ministry of public order. 
