29/03/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 29/03/07
Last year, Belgrade's war crimes trial chamber handed down sentences to 14 people accused of slaughtering prisoners following the Yugoslav Army's capture of Vukovar in 1991. Two others were acquitted for lack of evidence. 
However, the December verdict was annulled by the Supreme Court, which ordered a retrial. The new proceedings are under way, with most of the defendants again pleading not guilty. 
Miroljub Vujovic, the former Yugoslav Army commander for the territorial defence of Vukovar, told the Belgrade War Crimes Court that he did not commit the acts prosecutors allege. 
He said he was in hospital at the time the Croatian prisoners were executed, and only became territorial defence commander after Yugoslav forces, aided by Serbian paramilitary groups, took control of Vukovar. 
It was the same claim Vujovic made during the first trial, which ended with a guilty verdict against him and a 20-year prison sentence. 
Codefendant Stanko Vujanovic also repeated his earlier claims, seeking to cast doubt on the authenticity of the victims' list. He said he had knowledge that two people on the list -- Tomislav Prpic and Zoran Kovacevic -- did not die at Ovcara, but were killed earlier. 
The commander of a Serbian Radical Party volunteer unit, Milan Lancuzanin, also told the court that he was not guilty of shooting the Vukovar prisoners. So did two members of the Vukovar territorial defence, Predrag Milohevic and Djordje Sosic. 
One defendant, Ivan Atanasijevic, acknowledged having committed a criminal act, but denied responsibility for it. He said he was forced by his superiors to kill one prisoner. 
Vujo Zlatar, Milan Vojinovic, Jovica Peric, Predrag Madzarac and Goran Mugosa all denied involvement in the shootings. 
Five defendants declined to make a statement regarding the accusations. They were Predrag Dragovic and Miroslav Djankovic -- who received the maximum sentences during the earlier trial -- as well as Nada Kalaba, originally sentenced to nine years, and Marko Ljuboja and Slobodan Katic, who were acquitted. 
