09/01/2013
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 09/01/13 
With the support of the ministry of information, society and public administration, the Macedonian government initiated a project to encourage e-commerce. So far, three online stores have opened in the first phase of the project. 
"In an effort to increase the number of online stores in Macedonia, we announced two public calls. We opened three online stores, each offering specific consumer products," Ivo Ivanovski, minister of information, society, and public administration, told SETimes. 
One of the three e-stores in Macedonia is Tilla Stylish Kid's Wear, which is becoming a recognisable brand in the country, intended for girls from six months to 12 years of age. 
The Macedonian Handicrafts e-store is Ohrid-based, offers traditional Macedonian products. Potential customers with internet access can purchase various handicrafts such as icons, costumes and Ohrid pearls. The store offers about 40 products, with aim to increase the number of items. 
"All the products are handmade by master craftsmen from Macedonia," Misko Gjorseski, manager of Macedonian Handicrafts, told SETimes. 
"[This site] will be able to contribute to the preservation of the Macedonian national heritage, and encourage consumers through online purchases to support artisans, because in our country unfortunately the craftsmen make less and less of manually-crafted product. Carvings, icons, famous Ohrid pearl, textile handicrafts, and carpets are just some of the products offered on this website," Gjorseski said. 
Bitola-based wholesale Mart Alko is the third e-store as part of the government project, selling pharmaceutical products to citizens and pharmacies, offering drugs, medical and nutritional supplements and cosmetic products. 
Under the project, Ivanovski announced the second public call to open 50 electronic stores, whether for a new business or an original entrepreneurial idea. 
The competition requires a submission of a business plan and revenue projections. Individual applicants must prove their seriousness for an anticipated business, as Ivanovski said, citizens still need to build their confidence in electronic commerce. 
Marija Trajkoska is one of the new e-customers. 
"I bought beautiful handicrafts from the Ohrid store, which I needed for a gift for one of my friends abroad. I like how the store works," Trajkoska said. "In time, it will work great. After all, this way of shopping is easier." 
