16/04/2007
(EUobserver - 16/04/07; AP, AFP, Bloomberg, DPA, Deutsche Welle - 15/04/07)
Less than three weeks after the EU restarted membership talks with Turkey, German Chancellor Angela Merkel indicated on Sunday (April 15th) that the process could be further stepped up before Portugal replaces her country at the helm of the Union on July 1st. 
 "Under the German presidency of the EU, two more chapters could probably be opened if things go well," the German leader told reporters in Hanover following talks with Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. "We are looking ahead but the outcome of this process remains open," she added, stressing the need for Turkey to normalise ties with Cyprus. 
 In December, the EU decided to suspend talks with Turkey on eight negotiating chapters because of its refusal to open its ports and airports to traffic from Cyprus, whose Greek-run part joined the Union in May 2004. Ankara says it will do so only after the 27-nation bloc makes good on its promise to end the isolation of the Turkish Cypriots. Their breakaway state is recognised by Turkey alone. 
A signal of a thaw in the process of Turkey's membership negotiations came at the end of March, when the EU agreed to open talks with Ankara on enterprise and industrial policy -- the second of all 35 chapters a candidate country must complete to join the Union. 
"There is no question that Turkey and Europe have to move closer together," the AP quoted Merkel as saying at her joint press conference with Erdogan on Sunday. "The entire process is a long one and its result is open." 
Ankara "would value Germany's contribution in spurring a revival [of the talks] very highly", the Turkish leader said, a day after criticising Berlin for the lack of progress in his country's EU negotiations. 
Media reports quoted Erdogan as saying in an interview with German news magazine Der Spiegel, published on Saturday, that he "had seriously expected more" from Germany's six-month EU presidency, which began on January 1st. "We would like a clear idea of a date, a roadmap, a calendar for negotiations," he told the magazine, viewing "2014 or 2015" as a possible date for EU accession. 
 Turkey's accession talks are widely expected to take at least ten years to complete. 
Erdogan also reproached Germany for its "big mistake" in not inviting him or other Turkish officials to take part in celebrations marking the EU's 50th anniversary in late March. 
Speaking at Sunday's press conference, he defended his comments as "legitimate", but stressed that they were not directed at Merkel personally. 
 "One cannot attack a lady," said Erdogan. "We are on a long, narrow road and we have to be patient," he added, saying also that he hadn't been aware that the arrangements for the festivities were made before Germany took over the EU presidency. 
Before heading the German government, Merkel, who is also the leader of the conservative Christian Democratic Union, suggested that Turkey, a predominantly Muslim country of more than 70 million people, should be offered a "privileged partnership" with the bloc rather than full-fledged membership. As part of an agreement with her coalition partner, the centre-left Social Democratic Party, she has agreed to back entry talks with Ankara. 
Merkel and Erdogan met before the official opening of the Hanover Trade Fair, where Turkey is a guest nation this year. 
