04/07/2005
By Daniel Daianu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 04/07/05
The results of the referendums in France and Holland have demonstrated the depth of socioeconomic and political currents which have been present in a number of EU countries for years now. Many citizens are frustrated about the way the Union's enlargement has been unfolding. Flaws in the institutional set-up, which triggered the working out of the Treaty, combine with the erosion of the welfare state and the effects of globalisation to produce a volatile political dynamic. The talk about a democratic deficit in the EU is not without substance; rather, it reflects a schism between political elites and the population at large. 
There is a considerable variety of economic performance within the Union, with Scandinavian countries well ahead of Mediterranean ones in terms of GDP growth rates, employment, budgets and other factors. At the same time, a sense of stagnation among the older EU members is easy to discern. By and large, the Treaty of Rome signatory states are in the grip of economic fatigue. 
The relative merits and disadvantages of the Anglo-Saxon and Continental models are a source of ongoing debate. There are countries (Denmark, Finland, Sweden) that have not dismantled the welfare state and have achieved good economic performance while also scoring at the upper end of the EU spectrum in terms of fulfilling the targets of the Lisbon Agenda (which aims to boost competitiveness throughout the EU area). National experiences indicate, therefore, that actual economic performance depends on concrete institutional set-ups, which may or may not help cope with economic and technological change. 
Western European economies are confronted with social challenges which are rooted in the ageing populations, falling birthrates, a certain institutional sclerosis (which recalls economists Douglas North's and Mancur Olson's writings about the hijacking of public policy in market economies by vested interests), immigration and the competitive pressures generated by the new information and communication technologies and globalisation. More than a few EU member states have witnessed an increasing divide between, on the one hand, those who are capable of weathering the shocks produced by globalisation and new technology and, on the other, those who succumb to pressure and enroll among the ranks of the marginalised and disgruntled. EU member countries face increasingly intense competition from low wage countries, in the form of what is often called outsourcing or offshoring. This has become a major political theme in Western Europe as well as in the United States. 
How public policy can respond adequately to social and economic challenges is not easy to work out. The problems are quite clear, but policy answers involve complex trade-offs and painful adjustments. Frequently, co-ordination failures plague policy. Situations differ widely among various countries, although many have at least one thing in common: public budgets that are increasingly under strain. For instance, German companies excel at raising productivity and competing on foreign markets, but unemployment remains high at home and the public budget is well above 3 per cent of GDP. By contrast, in Italy competitiveness both at home and abroad is a source of worry for political and business elites, while the public budget appears to be spinning out of control. 
It is increasingly clear that finding a way out of the whole requires reform of the welfare state, in combination with public policies designed to stimulate R&D for the sake of enhancing competitiveness. Otherwise, gradual decline is almost inevitable. The achievement of Scandinavian countries in the past decade suggests a policy venue which could be replicated, more or less. Germany seems to have embarked on this road, although it faces heavy social opposition to painful measures. One way or another, the social contract between citizens and states has to be rewritten, preserving the basic ingredients of the welfare system while giving economies more flexibility and capacity to face global competition. Arguably, this presents the biggest challenge for the old EU member countries in the years to come. That this endeavour is inescapable is amply indicated by the response of people in the Western European countries to the recent round of enlargement. By bringing into the Union a number of low-wage economies, the eastward expansion amplified fears, among the existing member states, of runaway jobs, declining wages and other globalisation-era pressures. 
EU enlargement can be looked upon as a facet of globalisation, which frequently attracts blame for economic woes. Indeed, the rise of China and "India Unbound" has the potential to shake up what had previously seemed to be well-entrenched hierarchies. But it pays to ask ourselves whether the relapse into protectionism is the proper solution to the intensity of competition in the world economy. It is one thing to accuse low-wage countries of using unfair means (such as the exploitation of children), and another to blame them for capitalising on low wages to boost their exports. Low wages, by themselves, are not an unfair competitive tool. Is there any moral basis for asking lower-wage countries to slow their progress because of the damage this might inflict on stagnant economies in Western Europe? 
EU member states cannot avoid the need to stay competitive, which in turn requires revamping welfare systems and achieving technological change. But these objectives are time consuming and not easy to undertake socially. Politicians have to be more candid and persuasive in what they say and do. They have to form coalitions of interests in society that can support reforms effectively. 
The EU is going through hard times, a fact which complicates Bulgaria and Romania’s scheduled accession in 2007. Under the current circumstances, the possibility of a one-year delay is high. More MPs in the West are talking about halting, or indefinitely postponing, the enlargement process. This is not good news for the rest of Europe, in particular the Western Balkans, which has come to rely on the EU anchor as a powerful motivating force for political and economic progress. It remains to be seen whether the French and Dutch votes amount to a brief spate of turbulence, or a major sea change with a potentially deep impact on the region's prospects. 
