29/11/2007
(AFP, DPA, Xinhua, UN, ICTY - 28/11/07; AP, Reuters - 13/11/07)
The UN Security Council approved on Wednesday (November 28th) the appointment of Serge Brammertz as the new chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
The Belgian lawyer, nominated by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon earlier this month, will replace Carla del Ponte on January 1st, becoming the tribunal's fifth chief prosecutor. 
He takes up the post after leading for nearly two years an international commission tasked with investigating killings in Lebanon, including the February 2005 assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri. He was picked for that job while serving as a deputy prosecutor at the International Criminal Court in The Hague. Prior to that, he was federal prosecutor of Belgium. 
In a unanimously adopted resolution, the Security Council appointed Brammertz to a four-year term. However, it said his tenure could end earlier, if targets in the ICTY completion strategy are met. 
In August 2003, the 15-nation panel adopted Resolution 1503, calling on the UN tribunal to complete all trial activities at first instance by the end of 2008, and to finish all work in 2010. 
It also urged the countries involved in the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s to step up co-operation with the court, so that all its indictees -- particularly former Bosnian Serb political leader Radovan Karadzic and his military commander, Ratko Mladic -- can be brought to justice. The two face genocide charges in connection with the 1995 Srebrenica massacre and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo. 
Also wanted by UN prosecutors are former Bosnian Serb police commander Stojan Zupljanin and wartime Croatian Serb leader Goran Hadzic. 
Del Ponte, whose second four-year term expires on December 31st, notified Ban earlier this year that she planned to leave her post. According to media reports, she will next serve as Switzerland's ambassador to Argentina. 
The ICTY was established in 1993, with Ramon Escovar-Salom of Venezuela as its first chief prosecutor. He was succeeded by South Africa's Richard Goldstone, Louise Arbour of Canada and del Ponte. 
