23/05/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times -- 23/05/05
The new Turkish Penal Code (TCK), due to be implemented on 1 June, will bring vital changes to Turkey. Aiming to eliminate shortcomings targeted by the EU, it removes any reference to the death penalty in Turkish law, bars virginity testing, places the National Security Council under civil control, and increases punishments for ordinary crimes. Critics, however, argue that it still limits press freedom by using ambiguous or broadly-defined terminology, and by keeping in place penalties for "thought crimes" and insults against government figures or public officials. 
According to the Turkey Association of Journalists, the new TCK imposes a number of limits on press freedom. For example, prison terms can be increased by one third if a crime was committed via the media.The concept of "insult", says the association, is defined using vague, confusing terms that could be interpreted very broadly and lead to controversial decisions, thus limiting the media's room to manoeuvre. Furthermore, if a journalist is charged with insulting a minister, the insult is recorded as having been made against the entire cabinet -- allowing each individual minister to file a complaint against the journalist. 
 Thought crimes, crimes perpetrated against public order, and other related offenses carry penalties of between six months and five years in jail under the new TCK. That constitutes an indirect limit on media freedom, according to the association. 
The code was supposed to take effect on 1 April. Facing heavy criticism, however, the government postponed implementation until 1 June to make amendments in line with demands voiced by journalists' groups and NGOs. According to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the latest revision amends 26 articles and includes most of the changes sought by the press. 
Not so, says Press Council President Oktay Eksi, adding that his organisation will appeal to the European Court of Human Rights if parliament does not take action. 
"We argued that the rights of privacy in communication and personal privacy should be protected, but when journalists abuse those rights aiming to report in favour of the 'public interest', their acts should not be criminalised," Eksi said, adding that this demand had been refused by the government commission that drafted the TCK.
