06/06/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 06/06/06
The Croatian agency MediaPuls recently conducted a survey about newspaper reading habits in Croatia, covering the first quarter of 2006. The results show that Jutarnji List remains the most popular daily in the country. 
Some 16.6 per cent of citizens of Croatia read Jutarnji List every day, 15.4 per cent read Vecernji List, 15.3 per cent read the tabloid 24sata, while 6.5 per cent read Slobodna Dalmacija, the agency found. 
Papers with smaller readerships include Sportske Novosti (4.2 per cent), Novi List (4 per cent), Glas Istre (2 per cent) and Glas Slavonije (1.4 per cent). At the bottom are Zadarski List and Vjesnik, each read by 0.8 per cent of the population. The survey polled 10,350 citizens. 
The newspaper market has been undergoing massive changes. These days, the majority of people -- especially the young -- are turning to the Internet for their news. TV has also become more appealing, following the entry of commercial broadcasters into the Croatian market a few years ago. The national TV network HTV, with its two channels, still has the largest number of viewers, but it is facing strong competition from two private networks, NOVA and RTL. 
Croatians are enjoying an unprecedented level of choice when it comes to information. At the same time, the number of newspapers is increasing. No wonder, then, that newspaper publishers are pulling out all the stops in an effort to attract and retain readers. 
Newspapers and magazines have experimented with increasing and decreasing the number of pages. Some have given away free editions, or offered books, DVDs, CDs, candy or the chance to win an apartment. 
The successful publications have each found their niche. Jutarnji List is favoured by men, the highly educated, and the 30-39 age group. Vecernji List is more popular at the workplace. Housewives, the unemployed and those under the age of 29 are more likely to pick up 24sata when they stop at a newsstand. 
With Croatia still in a period of transition, media ownership is changing rapidly. Journalists do not always know who owns the publication for which they work. The state remains the largest player, followed by multinationals, the church and mixed ownership. 
Although the market is diversifying, analysts say, Croatia is still some way from achieving a truly independent media -- something that will also foster balance and higher journalistic standards. 
