04/10/2007
(AFP, Reuters, VOA, UN News Centre, Beta, B92, BIRN - 03/10/07)
Delays in the Kosovo status process could undermine everything the UN has sought to accomplish in the province, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon warned on Wednesday (October 3rd). He urged all parties involved to make every effort to reach a solution. 
"Momentum in the process to resolve the status of Kosovo must be maintained until closure is reached. Otherwise, there is a real risk of progress beginning to unravel and of instability in Kosovo and the region," he said in a new report, which will be presented to the Security Council on October 9th. 
No effort must be spared in finding an acceptable solution based on the guiding principles laid down by the six-nation Contact Group, Ban said. The group, composed of Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States, has ruled out a return to the pre-1999 situation, a change in Kosovo's existing boundaries, or partition. 
The status process opened in February 2006, with negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina led by former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari. Currently, an EU-US-Russian troika is leading a new round of talks. 
So far, the negotiations have failed to bridge the gap between the Kosovo Albanians, who are demanding full independence, and Belgrade, which says it can only offer substantial autonomy. 
 "Given the substantial gap between the parties ... consideration should be given to how to deal with the situation if the sides are unable to reach agreement by the end of the current period of engagement," the UN chief said in his report, which covers developments between June 1st and August 31st, 2007. 
While the security situation in Kosovo remained calm on the surface during the review period, there was "a discernible underlying volatility" and "simmering tensions" as a result of the extension of the status process, the UN chief noted. 
Meanwhile, a new poll by the Belgrade-based Centre for Free Elections and Democracy published on Wednesday, found that 41% of Serbs see keeping Kosovo as more important than their country's eventual EU membership. According to the poll, 37% would support severing diplomatic relations with nations that recognise independence for Kosovo without the UN's approval. The poll surveyed 1,632 people. 
