22/02/2005
(AP, Reuters, AFP, HINA, Radio B92 - 21/02/05)
Less than a month before the planned start of Croatia's EU accession talks, Zagreb came under pressure again Monday (21 February) to prove its full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and hand over a key war crimes suspect, retired General Ante Gotovina. 
"Full and unconditional co-operation by the countries of the Western Balkans with the ICTY remains an essential requirement for their continuing movement towards the EU," the Union's foreign ministers said in a statement after their regular monthly meeting in Brussels, adding that "the last remaining indictee must be located and transferred to The Hague as soon as possible". 
 In December, EU leaders gave the green light for opening membership negotiations with Croatia on 17 March, provided it co-operates fully with the ICTY and extradites Gotovina. 
One of the tribunal's three most-wanted indictees, he went into hiding in mid-2001, shortly after UN prosecutors charged him with war crimes over his alleged role in the killings of 150 Krajina Serbs and the expulsion of 150,000 others towards the close of the 1991-1995 conflict in Croatia. 
In a letter to the EU presidency last week, chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte said authorities "simply have not done everything in their power" to capture him. She also accused them of failing to break his support network, which she described as "alive, healthy and active". As a result, del Ponte said, she is unable to certify that Croatia is fully co-operating with The Hague. 
Senior officials in Brussels have stood by the December decision, emphasising that Croatia is welcome in the EU but must first meet the requirement for co-operation. "There are no surprises here, this is a precondition for negotiations to start," said Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn, whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency
For their part, Croatian authorities says they have stepped up efforts to track down the fugitive, while insisting that none of the information gathered to date has proven that Gotovina is in the country. 
 "We have services doing their jobs with increased intensity and with the aid of international experts. I am convinced we will step into his tracks," said President Stipe Mesic, who is scheduled to visit Brussels in the beginning of March. 
"It is up to us to show that we are transparent, responsible and fully engaged on this case," Reuters quoted Croatian Foreign Minister Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic as telling reporters in Brussels on Monday. "I believe we shall persuade the EU we are making the maximum effort." 
The EU foreign ministers' next regular meeting is scheduled for 16 March -- the last date for Brussels to decide whether negotiations with Croatia will begin the next day. 
