22/03/2011
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 22/03/11
With prices on many essential consumer items rising, Albanians are finding it harder to make ends meet. Experts attribute the inflation to a number of factors ranging from tax policy to low productivity and conditions on the global marketplace. 
"Oil and food products had a considerable price increase, following the international market price increase," Central Bank Governor Ardian Fullani said at a press conference in late February. "These products contribute to about 80% of the overall inflation." 
Since as much as 40% of the average Albanian family's budget covers food expenses, according to official data, price hikes in this area are especially painful. "New prices of agricultural products mostly affect lower income families," Fullani said. 
According to Albania's National Institute of Statistics (INSTAT), year-on-year inflation was 4.5% in February. The opposition Socialist Party disputes that figure, however, charging that INSTAT is whitewashing the picture in order to protect the government. 
"Over the last two months, every Albanian family has faced difficulties with the unstoppable price increase, also caused by monopolies of a corrupt group of politicians in power," Erion Brace, deputy leader of the Socialist parliamentary group, said at a press conference in early March. 
Consumers are also reeling from the imposition of a 10% value-added tax on medications. Finance Minister Ridvan Bode, however, says the measure was needed in order to improve market efficiency and end certain questionable practices. 
"The current market will become more competitive and avoid abusive prices," he said. 
A 20% VAT is also being applied to many professional services, such as those provided by lawyers, dentists, architects, engineers and veterinarians. Meanwhile, the government has raised the excise tax for cigarettes, lamps, plastic and most importantly oil. 
Other price hikes are being attributed to the worldwide market. The global economic crisis influenced the price increase for grain, authorities say, causing the cost of its byproducts to rise. 
"The price increase for bread is caused by international price increases for flour on stock markets. Domestic production [meets] only 20% of the needs," said Minister of Agriculture Genc Ruli. 
As a country with low productivity, Albania imports most of its food and other products, especially from the EU countries. The Central Bank says that productivity for an Albanian farmer is four times lower than farmers elsewhere in the region and 20 times lower than in the EU. 
Recent economic crises in Greece have also hit the Albanian economy hard, as Greece is Albania's major trading partner. 
