09/11/2004
By Seremb Gjergji for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 09/11/04
UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen has certified the final results of Kosovo's 23 October general election, paving the way for formation of the province's next government. 
He also told political leaders Monday (8 November) that more power will be transferred to the new government. The incoming cabinet will have three new ministries dealing with energy, local self-government, and returns and communities. In addition, the posts of deputy prime minister and deputy ministers will be established in the future. 
"Increased responsibility and capability will be expected of the government in order to prepare Kosovo for achieving the main standards that need to be established by the middle of 2005" Jessen-Petersen said in a statement. After signing the election results, he urged political parties to get down to work. 
Almost a week since the province's Central Election Commission announced the results, the main Kosovo Albanian political parties have not yet agreed on forming a coalition. 
According to local press reports Monday, President Ibrahim Rugova's Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) was expected to hold consultations this week with the leaders of the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK). 
The LDK won 45.42 per cent of the vote, failing to secure a clear majority to govern on its own. Quoting party sources, the Kosovo daily Zeri reported that LDK leaders were considering two possible scenarios for a coalition government. Under the first, the cabinet would be led by PDK leader Hashim Thaci, whose party came in second in the poll, with 28.9 per cent of the vote. The other scenario envisions a government headed by Ramush Haradinaj, whose AAK finished third. The majority of the LDK leadership reportedly supports that latter option. 
"The AAK will not enter into a coalition to become a bargaining tool between LDK and PDK, but to get the post of prime minister," the daily quoted an unnamed senior AAK official as saying. 
Several days ago, however, Haradinaj received a letter from the UN war crimes tribunal. It invited him to appear at a hearing in Pristina next week to discuss, in the AAK leader's words, "unspecified accusations linked to events which occurred during the 1998-1999 conflict", including Haradinaj's role. That could further complicate the political situation. 
Local papers predicted last week that Jessen-Petersen would likely intervene if the parties failed to reach an agreement within ten days. 
"All parties should listen to the message of the people, which is the improvement of living conditions, economic development, more jobs and much more security," Jessen-Petersen said, stressing the importance of listening to "the voices of the minorities, in particular the Serb minority". 
