30/01/2012
Compiled by Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times -- 30/01/12
Like many of his ancestors, Petar Zivanovic, 62, farms land in Bijeljina in the northeastern Semberija region, a key agricultural area for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). He has made a living from agriculture all his life, but is so discouraged now that he is reconsidering his options. 
"It doesn't pay to be a farmer. No matter whether I planted vegetables or grains, I ended up with losses only," Zivanovic told SETimes. "Everything is too expensive for planting, and I cannot be optimistic about weather conditions this year. Everything I planted in 2010 was destroyed by floods, last year by droughts, so this year I will not gamble." 
Throughout the Balkans, the severe drought is sapping power supplies, shriveling crops and draining budgets in a region already suffering through fiscal crises and the global economic slump. And the situation will likely only get worse, as the drought shows no end in sight. 
The drought, already five months along, is of historic proportions. Tatiana Mironova of the Moldovan Hydro-Meteorological Service says it’s the worst in decades."According to our records, the autumn of 2011 is comparable with the autumn of 1952." The effect is compounded by the fact that Moldova has no rivers or other major water resources. It is hit by a very dry season every three or four years. 
Mirce Kotevski has his eyes on the skies. The AD Macedonian Power Plants (ELEM) expert tells SETimes "After months of drought, every drop of rain is welcome, but this year's snow in Macedonia is far from enough to compensate for the lack of rain this fall. We expect to get the real picture of the situation with the water resources in March or April. The temperatures in the mountains are still low, so there is no quick melting and influx of water." Compared to last year, the water flow is 70% lower and hydropower plants are operating at 15% of their capacity. That makes costly electricity imports inevitable. 
The drought's effect on power supplies has been severe. In Albania for example, where water resources are critical to the predominantly hydropower-based energy system, the drought triggered electricity cuts ahead of winter. As temperatures began to fall, consumption increased, overloading the network and causing chronic outages across the country. It also forced the government to approve a request from the country's power corporation, KESH, to immediately take a $50m loan for energy imports. 
According to KESH, electricity production in Albania currently stands at 11 million kWh/day, while imports have reached 12 million kWh/day. 
In Romania, the hydro-energy output has trickled to 50% since September, falling at times below that from the country's lower capacity Aeolian stations. That means the main energy producers, for now, are the thermo-power stations, which are very costly. This, coupled with the temporary shut-down of a reactor at the Cernavoda nuclear power plant, adds up to a price hike. Electricity rates will rise by 5% in Romania as of February 1st. 
Kosovo is also heavily dependent on thermo power and Deputy Minister for Economic Development Ramadan Hasani says it is too early to say whether hikes are in store. "Personally, I believe that even if there is any increase, it would be symbolic, due to the need to invest in the technical infrastructure of the power supply network," he told SETimes. Kosovo covers about 90% of its power supply needs from domestic production and the rest from imports. 
Consumers virtually across the region can expect to dig deeper at the grocery stores as well, due to poor wheat and corn crops. In BiH for example, "The amount [of wheat] we produced will cover perhaps only our domestic needs, leaving nothing for export. The situation is similar in Serbia, Croatia and Hungary, so we'll have to buy wheat from other and more expensive markets," Vladimir Usorac, president of the Farmers' Association of RS, told SETimes. 
He adds, "The forecasts for 2012 are also bleak, which means that the price we will have to pay for each grain could be three times higher than its cost… Unfortunately, we are likely to face terrible food shortages and price increases that will be very difficult." He also notes the amount of arable land used to grow wheat and vegetables in RS has shrunk significantly over the past decade. 
For consumers, price hikes will extend beyond flour and bread. Meat prices could jump by about 20%, due to corn shortages. "The drought will devastate the fields of corn, which is the most important cereal for animal feed," Miso Maljcic of the Farmers' Association of RS told SETimes. "It is therefore logical that this will affect the price of animal feed and meat prices." 
Professor Rade Protic of the Belgrade-based Institute for Application of Science in Agriculture is worried about spring planting. Yields and returns already look dicey, given the lack of groundwater present even before seeds go into the ground. Without rain, what Serbia needs, he tells SETimes, is a well developed irrigation system, though he says the country "never has enough money for such an investment that returns in two to three years". 
This longer term view is not particularly rosy in a region so desperate for snow and rain, following the extreme heat of summer 2011. The larger ramifications of drought are daunting. 
Take Romania for example, where agricultural production was actually very strong last year, leading to a 12.3% increase of GDP over the first nine months. 
A much poorer yield is expected in 2012, even in the event of abundant rainfall. Ovidiu Marincea, deputy chief-editor of the daily Adevarul, who supervises the economic affairs department, tells SETimes. "The big players in agriculture say that, even if it rained from now on, there will be a 20-30% drop in this year's production. But if it doesn't rain sufficiently until spring, the losses rise to as much as 70%." 
A much lower agricultural output could jeopardise Romania's prospects of achieving 2% economic growth forecast for this year, Marincea warned. "The very good performance in agriculture last year raised foreign investors' confidence in the Romanian economy. But this could as well play the other way around and turn into a major deterrent," he added. 
Back in RS, Ljubo Maletic, president of the Farmers' Association of Semberija, empathises with farmer Petar Zivanovic. "Natural disasters have left a big impact on agricultural production," he told SETimes. "We understand the farmers when they say that it doesn't pay to be a farmer." 
  SETimes correspondents Jonilda Koci in Tirana, Bedrana Kaletovic in Sarajevo, Linda Karadaku in Pristina, Aleksandar Pavlevski in Skopje, Alina Radu in Chisinau, Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest and Ivana Jovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report.   
