28/09/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina - 28/09/07
UNMIK deputy chief Steven Schook confirmed on Wednesday (September 26th) that he is under investigation by the UN's Internal Oversight Office for possible misconduct. He said that while the office has not informed him personally about the probe, he has become aware of it because of interviews conducted with members of his staff. 
"According to the information I've managed to gather, the probe pertains to my alleged aggressive behaviour, unprofessionalism and close relationships with Energy Minister Ethem Ceku and former Kosovo Prime Minister Ramush Haradinaj, and extends to personal relationships I supposedly had with some women from Kosovo and those working with the UNMIK mission," Schook told reporters. 
 His comments came during what he described as a personal press conference. He stressed that he was not representing any official UNMIK stance. 
"The first thing I'm guilty of is loving my job," Schook said. "The second thing is being extremely passionate about what I do and doing it to the best of my ability, not acting like a diplomat, being determined to get things done, making friends and making enemies, having a low tolerance for anything that stops Kosovo from getting better, supporting elections and open lists, supporting Project C as a key to the future economic prosperity of Kosovo and as a part of that supporting everyone in the Project Steering Committee including its chairman, Minister Ethem Ceku." 
 He said he had great respect for Haradinaj's performance as prime minister and his "exemplary co-operation" with the UN war crimes tribunal, which indicted him in March 2005. Schook ruled out the possibility of stepping down, and insisted that he would not allow the allegations to affect his responsibilities and the status process. 
Reaction in Kosovo has been mixed. In an editorial published Thursday, the local daily Express deemed Schook's press conference insulting. "Perhaps he believed that we believe what he was saying to tens of journalists," editor-in-chief Berat Buzhala wrote. 
Writing in Zeri, however, Environment and Spatial Planning Minister Ardian Gjini accused the media of declaring Schook guilty without waiting to see whether the allegations against him are true. 
