14/08/2009
(Dnevnik, Mediapool, Sofia Echo - 14/08/09; Pari, Novinite, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Sofia Echo - 13/08/09; Sofia Echo, Novinite - 12/08/09; Dnevnik - 11/08/09; Sofia Echo 09/08/09; Reuters - 07/08/09)
Bulgarian Prime Minister Boyko Borisov said on Thursday (August 13th) he has asked the prosecutor's office to expedite investigations into cases of budgetary abuse by the previous government. 
"For years huge surpluses were accrued, and now these surpluses are gone and we do not have roads," he told reporters at the inauguration of a renovated 2.5km section of a road in the Bulgarian capital. 
Borisov's centre-right Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria (GERB) won the July 5th parliamentary elections on promises that corrupt high-level officials will face justice and that his party will restore the rule of law. 
In the first two weeks since the GERB cabinet was sworn in on July 27th, various ministers have revealed numerous cases of possible fraud and graft. 
Aside from the direct budgetary losses from malfeasances, the EU froze over half a billion euros in financial assistance to Bulgaria last year because of its failure to combat high-level corruption and organised crime. 
 One of the most scandalous cases was disclosed by Regional Development Minister Rosen Plevneliev, who accused predecessor Asen Gagauzov of having spent more than 21m euros for repairs of the ministry building shortly before the end of his mandate. The 2,250 euros per square metre paid to the sole bidder in the public procurement tender was several times higher than market prices. 
 "I inherited a ministry which is not paying its debts, is in a state of bankruptcy, and does not observe the construction rules and the market prices," Plevneliev said. 
Sofia-based daily Dnevnik reported earlier this week that investigations have been launched into alleged cases of wrongdoing in the agriculture, transport and social ministries. 
The only high-level official to be charged with abuse of power since the new government took office is Stefan Yurukov, the former head of Bulgaria's state forestry agency. He is accused of alleged involvement in a land swap deal involving forests near the southern Black Sea town of Sozopol. The deal was part of a broader scheme involving similar deals concluded this year and last. 
"Charges have been raised against Yurukov and he has been banned from leaving the country," Reuters quoted the prosecutors' office spokesman as saying. 
An anti-corruption coalition assessed in a recent report that Bulgaria had lost about 4 billion euros during the previous government's four-year term in office due to such swaps. 
Describing the mandate of his cabinet as successful, former Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev has been insisting that the country is in good enough shape financially, and that his government included sufficient buffers in the budget to address the challenges of the economic crisis. 
