29/06/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 29/06/06
The ruling coalition on Wednesday (28 June) defeated a no-confidence motion tabled by the Social Democratic Party (PSD). The document charged that, after 500 days in power, the centre-right government has not made good on campaign promises. 
The PSD focused its main criticism on social issues such as the health system, education, and pensions, while also attacking what it called "irresponsible, incoherent" fiscal policies that affected the business climate. In addition, it accused the government of a "chaotic reaction" to the bird flu outbreak and recent floods. 
After a particularly heated debate, the PSD no-confidence motion received just 145 votes out of the 235 it needed to topple the cabinet. 
In his speech, Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu ridiculed the PSD's attempt as "empty words, populism and lies". Opposition leader Mircea Geoana is "disconnected from reality" and has failed to reform his own party, he added. 
Tariceanu also defended his mandate, saying his government has cleaned up the mess left it by the PSD. "From being the European laggard, as it was when the PSD left power, Romania has now become a model for accession preparedness," the prime minister said. 
For his part, Geoana described Tariceanu's words as "typical of a desperate man, at the end of his mandate". He pointed to the rivalries between the president and the prime minister, suggesting President Traian Basescu's aides are "preparing a new Liberal prime minister". Earlier this month, Tariceanu did not attend Basescu's speech in parliament on the state of the nation. 
Tuesday, with his unexpected proposal to withdraw Romania's 890 troops from Iraq, Tariceanu surprised Basescu, a staunch supporter of a continuing Romanian military presence in Iraq. Emil Boc, the leader of Basescu's Democratic Party, has already blasted the initiative as an "act of irresponsibility" and said Tariceanu and the Liberals had failed to consult him. 
There is little question that Tariceanu has political difficulties ahead. His approval ratings have been slipping, and his volatile relationship with the charismatic president appears to be heating up. Ongoing tensions between the Democrats and Liberals have made the government difficult to run. 
However, Wednesday's vote suggests that the PSD's efforts to capitalise on the situation have been too ambitious, or at least premature. There were no defections within the uneasy four-party coalition. The Conservative Party, which had threatened to leave the government after its leader Dan Voiculescu was accused of being a former Communist secret service informant, eventually decided to stay. 
