19/12/2011
(Reuters, BBC, Wall Street Journal, The Sofia Echo - 19/12/11; AP, The New York Times, The Washington Post, Deutsche Welle, BBC, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik.bg, Nine O'clock, Xinhua -- 18/12/11)
World leaders and ordinary people in Europe and many other parts of the globe have expressed their sadness and regret over the death of former Czech President Vaclav Havel, who passed away on Sunday (December 18th) morning at the age of 75. 
The dissident playwright and freedom fighter, who led the anti-communist Velvet Revolution in the former Czechoslovakia 22 years ago, died in his sleep at his weekend house after prolonged ill-health, according to his secretary, Sabina Tancevova. 
"Today Vaclav Havel has left us," she said in a brief statement. 
The former president's wife, Dagmar, was present when he passed away. 
Havel was born on October 5th 1936 in Prague, where his well-to-do family owned prime real estate, including the Barrandov film studios that were seized by the communist regime after the 1948 putsch in Czechoslovakia. Authorities banned him from studying because of his bourgeois descent. Overcoming that hurdle, he attended evening classes and managed to complete his secondary education in 1954, while working as a technician at a chemical laboratory. 
Havel, who was not accepted into any post-secondary school with a humanities programme either, did not despair. Already a writer and a director, he was banned from the theatre following the Prague Spring in 1968, after which he became more involved in Czechoslovakia's dissident movement. 
The author of 19 plays, Havel spent a total of five years in jail during the country's communist times, when he was closely watched by secret police for two decades until the regime's fall in 1989. 
In January 1977, he became one of the co-authors of Charter 77, a manifesto urging the national authorities to comply with their own international commitments on human rights. 
"A spectre is haunting Eastern Europe: the spectre of what in the West is called "dissent". This spectre has not appeared out of thin air," Havel wrote in 1978 in an essay, entitled The Power of the Powerless. 
"It is a natural and inevitable consequence of the present historical phase of the system it is haunting. It was born at a time when this system, for a thousand reasons, can no longer base itself on the unadulterated, brutal, and arbitrary application of power, eliminating all expressions of nonconformity. What is more, the system has become so ossified politically that there is practically no way for such nonconformity to be implemented within its official structures." 
But it took more than a decade before the Velvet Revolution broke out in Czechoslovakia in the middle of November 1989. As people in the country were preparing to celebrate their first post-communist New Year in more than four decades, Havel became their first democratically elected president on December 29th 1989. 
He also served as the last head of state of Czechoslovakia, until its peaceful dissolution three years later. Havel was then elected the first president of the newborn Czech Republic in January 1993, a post he served in until 2003. 
Two days before he died, the Economist Intelligence Unit issued its 2011 Democracy Index, naming the Czech Republic as the only East European country among the 25 nations meeting the group's "full democracy" criteria. 
The news of Havel's death saddened many at home and abroad. Hundreds of candles were lit in his memory in Prague's Wenceslas Square on Sunday, as letters of condolences started pouring into the country from all over the world. 
"He was a true European and has been a champion of democracy and liberty throughout his life," European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso said. "He was also a source of great inspiration to all those who fight for freedom and democracy around the world. The man has died but the legacy of his poems, plays and above all his ideas and personal example will remain alive for many generations to come." 
US President Barack Obama also paid tribute to Havel's role in the fight against communism, not only in his own country, but in the entire former Soviet bloc. 
"His peaceful resistance shook the foundations of an empire, exposed the emptiness of a repressive ideology, and proved that moral leadership is more powerful than any weapon," he said. 
Lech Walesa, the founder of Poland's anti-communist Solidarity movement, was also saddened by Havel's death, as were leaders and officials in other Central and East European countries. 
"His outstanding voice of wisdom will be missed in Europe. I am praying for the peace of his soul," Walesa said. 
Voicing regret over Havel's death, former Romanian President Ion Iliescu and former Prime Minister Petre Roman both praised the Czech freedom fighter as "one of the most prominent political figures" in world history. 
Former Bulgarian President Zhelyu Zhelev and incumbent Prime Minister Boyko Borisov also mourned Havel's death. 
"I have just lost a person that is very, very dear to me," Zhelev, Bulgaria's first post-communist president, said. "After we were no longer presidents, we've met at least 20 times at international forums. We were brought together by our common view of a peaceful transition but also by our interests in philosophy, culture, arts." 
Borisov described Havel as a "great European" in the letter of condolences he sent to Prague on Sunday. 
"We all carry deep in us the European spirit embodied in President Havel's bold words and thinking," the Bulgarian prime minister wrote. 
Praising the late Czech president for his courage in the fight against communism, EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton said that Havel's name will remain forever "synonymous with the successful struggle for freedom in Central and Eastern Europe and the reunification of Europe". 
"His legacy will live on through his writing, but most of all through his extraordinary life story, which will inspire us all long into the future," Ashton said. 
