26/06/2008
By Kristina Čuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 26/06/08
According to the Croatian Institute for Social Research, only about 8% of youth are involved in the country's politics. The number is troubling since a lack of new faces in politics can render a country's decision-making stagnant. 
The director of the Political Science Research Centre in Zagreb, Andjelko Milardović, says only 14% of parliamentary candidates are under 30. Many participate only as a formality or as an effort to validate older politicians' dubious claim that the young are entering politics. 
 Low interest in politics among the younger generation in Croatia dates back to the 1990s. Today, unemployment, low living standards and unsolved crime compound young people's discontent with politics. 
 "I don't have any ambition to be in politics, as I don't think I could change anything in my country," said Zvonimir Duić, 27. 
Natalie, an unemployed 26-year-old economist from Zagreb, says she is totally apolitical. She says she helped a party during the last campaign while unsuccessfully trying to make job contacts. 
Those interested in politics cannot enter top party ranks, as senior politicians monopolise the positions. Though parties have branches for young politicians, they receive inadequate attention as insiders doubt their qualifications for higher levels of government. 
Although some among the youth may be interested in becoming politically active, they receive little encouragement. In addition, most young people consider politics corrupt and seek no part in it, focusing instead on private matters and less on public interests. Apathy is so high that the young are often ignorant of politicians and their positions. 
To fan interest, GONG, the nonpartisan citizens' organisation, conducts a series of workshops to draw youth into the political process. In 2002, GONG began a nationwide project. At the start of each academic year, interactive workshops on political issues occur in high schools throughout the country. 
Croatian authorities are seeking a change. Many hope that politicians and those in leadership positions will inspire youth to enter politics by offering them motivation, instruction and attention. 
