07/12/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/12/11
Strained relations between Belgrade and Budapest took a turn for the better Monday (December 5th) when the Serbian parliament adopted the law on rehabilitation. 
Budapest and the ethnic Hungarians in Serbia were not happy with the draft version of the law, which excluded the return of property to all who were drafted by occupation units during World War II. 
The Hungarian parties in Serbia claimed that such legal provisions discriminated against their community. During World War II, large numbers of Hungarians in Serbia were often forcefully drafted into units of the Hungarian Army, which occupied parts of the Serbian province of Vojvodina. 
The current version of the law stipulates that rehabilitation, and consequently the return of property, will be an option for everyone who did not commit war crimes. 
"The government welcomes the fact that the law was adopted after consultation between the Serbian government and the Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians," the Hungarian government said. 
A portion of the ruling coalition refused to back the solution, but the law was still able to pass by a thin majority. 
The solutions satisfied the Hungarians, whose leading party is a member of the ruling coalition in Serbia. 
Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians MP Laslo Varga told SETimes that the adoption of the law "removes the injustice done to the Hungarian community", adding that the party's demands "have been met to the last point and comma". 
"The essence of the law is that none of those who did not commit a war crime during World War II will be excluded from the restitution process, while all who have suffered injustice will have the right to launch rehabilitation proceedings," he said. 
But not all in the ruling coalition accepted the new solutions. 
Representative of the League of Social Democrats of Vojvodina Aleksandra Jerkov, who did not vote for the law, said the original draft legislation did not target Hungarians, but rather aimed to protect the victims of fascism during the war. 
"The law that has been adopted offers too broad grounds for who can be rehabilitated and thereby gain the right to restitution," Jerkov told SETimes. 
The law did not get the votes of another ruling coalition member, the Social Democratic Party of Serbia, either. MP Meho Omerovic said the party did not want "the collaborators of the occupiers and losers in World War II to be rehabilitated" in 2011. 
"That would be desecration of history and the double murdering of the victims," Omerovic said. 
Due to alleged discrimination against Hungarians in the Restitution Law, in early October Hungary threatened to veto Belgrade's association with the EU. 
"We are most devoted to Serbia's European integration, but accession is not realistic with laws that collectively deny people their civic rights," Hungarian Deputy Prime Minister Zsolt Semjen said on October 2nd. 
During a debate on the bill on rehabilitation, Serbian Justice Ministry State Secretary Slobodan Homen described the law as a compromise, adding that he hoped the Hungarian community would be pleased. 
"The essence of the law is that all individuals who have suffered injustice from the state have the right to rehabilitation. It was often the case in post-war years that people would lose property and rights based on an administrative decision," Homen said. 
After World War II, around 9,000 people were proclaimed war criminals. According to some estimates, about 1.7 million people were killed in the former Yugoslavia between 1941 and 1945. 
