11/07/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 11/07/11
Ismail Besikci is an elderly man now, and he speaks in a quiet voice. Those unfamiliar with his life and career might not take him for anything but a veteran professor in the autumn of his career. 
But this mild-mannered academic is a fighter, having been kicked out of the university system and imprisoned for 17 years as a result of his groundbreaking work on Turkey's Kurds. 
According to the state ideology of the time, there was no such thing as a Kurdish person or the Kurdish language. Officials explained away the minority with the help of comical theories on the existence of "mountain Turks". 
Besikci has become the symbol of a long history of academic repression and harsh censorship in Turkey, though he is far from the only professor to have lost his job or spent time in jail. The situation has improved, however, he told SETimes. 
"There have been many very important changes over the past ten years, and academic freedom will continue to increase," Besikci said. "Awareness will be raised." 
A similarly explosive issue within the Turkish academy has been the Armenian massacres of the early 20th century, whose very occurrence -- let alone the claim that they amounted to genocide -- is a topic of fierce national debate. 
Today, history departments in Turkish universities have far more liberty to examine such subjects, a testament to the progress that has been made. 
Fikret Adanir, a professor of history at Sabanci University, believes that freedom of expression is crucial for the future of Turkey's universities. 
"In this country, from the perspective of academic freedom, I believe the most important development is that topics that are sensitive in the context of Turkish nationalism, like the Armenian and Kurdish problem, can now be debated in a public setting," he explains to SETimes. 
As a Turkish professor working in the United States, Hakan Ozoglu is able to approach these issues from a more comparative perspective. 
"I understand the argument that each freedom is limited and societies have 'sacred spaces' that need to be protected," he says, acknowledging that such spaces exist in the United States, as well. "The problem with academic freedom in the Turkish academia is that its 'sacred space' is very large and the exact boundaries are rather vague." 
This vagueness can lead to a culture of uncertainty, as the stakes of pushing the bounds of propriety are unclear. It is in this context, where state pressure has lifted some, but not entirely, that two other specters appear: self-censorship and pressures to conform exerted by the universities themselves. 
"Self-censorship is a result of the fear of being bullied by university administration or the higher education system in Turkey," Ozoglu says. 
Anadir speaks of the limits this imposes on academics, explaining, "While in principle, any topic of interest can be researched at any Anatolian university, a doctoral project that isn't supported by the upper ranks of the hierarchy isn't going to do much for someone's academic career." 
Thus, while the threat of jail time has eased, job security for professors of controversial subjects is still far from guaranteed, and professors and advocates of free speech believe there is progress left to be made. 
Notably, however, the consensus seems to be that the remaining issues will be tackled, and that the trajectory is an upward one. 
"Am I pessimistic about the future?" Adanir mused to himself, concluding, "No. I believe that society is currently transforming and democratizing with remarkable speed." 
