31/01/2008
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 31/01/08
Families of the 12 firefighters who died on Kornati Island in Croatia are seeking damages totaling 1.1m euros, with the families of the youngest victims demanding the greatest amount. Local authorities in Vodnjan and Tisno will be responsible if the court orders the payment. 
 When fire broke out in the Kornati National Park in August 2007, 23 firefighters were dropped onto the island by helicopter. The men split up a few times until a team of 13 firefighters was stranded between two hills with no water because the large water canister landed 500m away. 
 While searching for the firewall, the team became encircled. Although the burning grass was only 10cm tall, the firemen didn't have the necessary equipment -- and some say training -- to fight the fire and were trapped. 
 Six died immediately, while the other seven were badly burned and waited for more than two hours for help. Twelve of the 13 firefighters died, including some as young as 17 years old. 
The fire had nowhere to spread on the island and was soon naturally extinguished, raising questions about the necessity of the operation. Additionally, Mountain Rescue Service Head Stipe Bozic said some circumstances such as the lack of mobile telephone signals and weather conditions on the island made the rescue operation more difficult. 
Police determined the cause of the fire to be a cigarette butt thrown into the grass by Pasko Petrina, a 20-year-old park receptionist. He is facing up to three years in prison for endangering public safety, according to a report from the State Attorney's Office. 
Fire Chief Mladen Jurin and Sibenik-Knin County Firefighting Commander Drazen Slavica resigned after the tragedy because they felt "morally responsible". Slavica was taken into custody on September 6th while authorities determined if he bore command responsibility for the disaster. He was released on October 6th when the investigation was complete. 
Frane Lucic, 23, the only surviving firefighter, was released from Split's general hospital on Christmas Eve. He suffered severe injuries, was in critical condition for days and endured several operations. 
 He still moves and talks slowly, lost fingers on both hands and depends on the help of others as both of his fists are completely burned and mutilated. 
In an interview with the Slobodna Dalmacija daily, Lucic described the fire. "We saw the flames approaching quickly. We could not breathe and we started to run, dropping the equipment. I ran like never before, but the fire caught up with me," he said. 
"As I was set on fire, I managed to put on my helmet, which saved my face. I threw myself into the grass but that caused my hands to burn," he added. 
