18/01/2011
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica --18/01/11
Last month's arrests of top officials in the Montenegrin resort town of Budva raised expectations that the country is starting to meet EU demands that it deal more aggressively with organised crime and corruption. 
But did the action also have a political motivation? Some analysts charge that it helped longtime leader Milo Djukanovic strengthen his hand, at the expense of rivals within the ruling Democratic Party of Socialists (SPS). 
"Bearing in mind the kind of society we live in, in which institutions are dependent on political influence, it would be naive to believe that such an action happened without at least the tacit approval of Djukanovic," Stevo Muk, president of the NGO Alternativa Institute, told SETimes. 
On December 24th, authorities detained Budva Mayor Rajko Kuljaca, municipality vice-president Dragan Marovic, and eight other officials and construction company owners. Djordje Pinjatic, a member of parliament, was arrested three days later. 
A special prosecutor has charged them with abuse of office, including embezzlement, in connection with the construction of an elite tourist resort called Zavala. 
Marovic's brother, DPS Vice-President Svetozar Marovic, is widely considered the political boss of Budva. 
Construction of the resort began in 2007, and proceeded even after a local NGO, MANS, discovered the project lacked the necessary permits. But strong public and media pressure eventually led the authorities to step in, and Zavala remains unfinished. 
 Chief prosecutor Ranka Carapic denies the arrests -- which followed three years of investigation -- have anything to do with politics. 
"The decision to arrest the ten suspects ... was reached at the moment when the lawful conditions materialised, that is, when we secured enough proof for a reasonable suspicion that those individuals committed crimes," Carapic said. 
But the timing of the move, coming only days after Milo Djukanovic stepped down as Montenegro's prime minister, continues to fuel speculation. Djukanovic retained his position as DPS party president, and analysts say the arrests will help him stay in that job. 
 According to Muk, inspiring confidence in the police, prosecutors and judicial system will require sustained effort, rather than the occasional high-profile sting. 
"We need to do much more and prosecute other cases to show that there really is a willingness and ability of institutions to deal with crime and corruption at all levels and in all areas," he said. "The EU seeks tangible results." 
"If we see other similar actions, or if the prosecution and the police begin to address numerous public scandals, allegations and indications, then this can be considered the beginning of a decisive battle against corruption and organised crime," said another analyst, Daliborka Uljrarevic. 
 "But nothing can remove the impression that the initial impetus came as a result of conflict between political, business and other circles in the DPS," she added. 
