20/06/2005
(Journal of Turkish Weekly - 20/06/05; AFP, Cyprus News Agency, Dnevnik.bg - 19/06/05; BBC, International Herald Tribune, The Independent - 18/06/05; RFE/RL - 17/06/05)
Greek Cypriot Parliamentary Speaker Demetris Christofias cautioned on Sunday (19 June) that a "chill" in the EU stand on Turkey's membership bid could affect efforts to end the more than 30-year division of Cyprus. 
"We've said many times that we view Turkey's European course to be a catalyst for a Cyprus settlement," the AFP quoted Christofias as saying in an interview with Greek Cypriot state television Sunday. "It's at this point that we could meet with some problems." 
His remarks came less than two days after the EU lurched deeper into crisis. In the early hours of Saturday, a crunch summit of the leaders of the 25-nation bloc broke up without an agreement on the Union's 2007-2013 budget. 
The crisis was first sparked by the recent French and Dutch "no" votes to the EU constitutional treaty, which some said reflected -- at least partly -- the voters' reservations to an expansion that would include Turkey. Last week's Eurobarometer polls in France and the Netherlands, however, seemed to suggest otherwise, with only 6 per cent of the French and 3 per cent of the Dutch respondents saying they had voted against the constitution because of Turkey. 
On day one of their two-day summit in Brussels, the European leaders managed to find a temporary solution to the constitutional problem by extending the November 2006 deadline for the charter's ratification to give the member states time to reflect on the issue. While voicing their will to implement previous decisions on enlargement, Turkey was not mentioned by name in the meeting's conclusions. 
On Sunday, Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul cautioned that the EU's constitutional problem and the deadlock over the bloc's budget could affect his country's entry bid. 
"We could not say at this time that everything that has happened will not affect enlargement and Turkey, we must wait until the dust settles," the AFP quoted Gul as saying in an interview with the Turkish newspaper Radikal. 
During their summit in December, the EU leaders set 3 October as the start date for Turkey's accession negotiations, making it conditional on implementation of economic and political reforms. For the talks to begin as scheduled, Ankara must also sign a protocol extending its customs agreement with the Union to the ten new EU member states, including Cyprus, which it is in the process of doing. 
Following the Brussels summit, Deniz Baykal, the leader of Turkey's main opposition Republican People's Party, urged Ankara not to sign the additional protocol of the customs agreement. 
Turkey does not recognise the Greek Cypriot republic and has been insisting that signing the customs protocol would not imply recognition. An EU member since May of last year, the Greek Cypriots are trying to use Turkey's accession bid as a powerful tool for winning concessions on the UN-reunification plan, which their community overwhelmingly rejected in a referendum in April 2004. 
Britain, which is due to take over the rotating EU presidency from Luxembourg on 1 July, has suggested that its priorities would include enlarging the EU and opening membership talks with Turkey. It is also expected to try to push forward the process of finding a solution to the Cyprus issue, as the EU will play a key role in any future reunification talks. 
