21/05/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 21/05/09
The OSCE mission in Kosovo published a fairly scathing report last month on how the Kosovo judiciary has addressed property-rights disputes. Titled "Litigating Ownership of Immovable Property in Kosovo", it criticises the current legal uncertainty and judicial practices in this area. 
The OSCE, which has been monitoring property cases since 2004, said the country's laws on immovable-property rights are "complex, often unclearly drafted, and scattered throughout a variety of instruments". Together with a jumble of administrative decisions and court practices, they create a "complicated and seemingly impenetrable system for determining contests over ... ownership", it said. 
According to the UN-administered Relief Web, the study found that Kosovo "courts often give greater weight to the testimony of interested parties than to documentary evidence", demonstrating a pattern of faulty reasoning and improperly weighted evidence. 
The courts often justify transfer of property without production of a legal contract, the study reported, which runs contrary to applicable law and is widely considered a dubious practise in a post-conflict environment with many absent or missing landowners. 
According to the OSCE, courts often "failed to cite legal provisions supporting their decisions" and are too ready to "appoint temporary representatives for absent respondents without following proper procedures". 
Christopher Decker of the OSCE noted the problems implicit when ownership is such a tangle. "Proper adjudication of disputes ... is important because it enforces the rule of law, it promotes human rights and it enables the return of displaced persons," said Decker, adding that "economic development" requires transparent laws governing property ownership. 
The turmoil and fighting of the 1990s made it difficult to determine ownership of Kosovo property. War destroyed many records, and departing Serbs moved cadastral registries to Serbia but may claim ownership of 58.79% of the land in Kosovo. 
In addition, many Kosovo citizens have gone through numerous legal systems in their lifetime, including the communist Yugoslavia, the 1980s liberalism era, the 1990s period under Milosevic when Kosovo lost its autonomous status, UNMIK and the Republic of Kosovo. 
The Kosovo Property Agency, established in 2006 to process claims on private immovable property, lists 40,487 property claims in Kosovo on its web site -- a considerable number for a country of approximately 2 million. Most affected by uncertainty are Pec, Gnjilane, Prizren and Pristina. 
The instability of property undercuts the confidence of every Kosovo citizen, whether they be "a Kosovo Albanian, a displaced Kosovo Serb ... or a Kosovo Roma precariously living in an informal settlement", warned the International Centre for Transitional Justice. 
According to the centre, the country can foster reconciliation by respecting its old proverb, "Cdo njeri eshte mbret ne shtepine e tij." (Every man is king in his own home). 
