15/05/2013
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/05/13
Although Kosovo and Albania are majority Muslim, and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has a significant Muslim population, relations between these countries and the Middle East have been slow to develop. 
The three countries, which aspire to join the EU, have cautiously pursued relations with the Middle East out of concern that it could harm relations with the West. 
Alban Bokshi, former head of the Foreign Policy Club in Pristina, told SETimes there is always room for improving relations, and that Kosovo has made strides in the past two years. Kosovo's Foreign Minister Enver Hoxhaj and other senior officials have made visits to the Middle East. 
"It seems that for a long time Kosovo tried to avoid the Middle East, as it had fear that contact with the countries of that region and the Muslim countries in general could turn Kosovo to the 'Axis of Evil.' This is ridiculous and has surfaced ignorance of Kosovo's institutions dealing with foreign policy," Bokshi said. 
Jakup Krasniqi, speaker of Kosovo's parliament, recently visited Kuwait, while Hoxhaj traveled to Yemen. Kosovo has kept contacts with the Arab League and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference to increase the number of recognitions by Muslim and Arab countries. The country also has an ambassador in Saudi Arabia. 
"Kosovo should devote much more of its own resources in terms of strengthening relations with the Middle East because of the need for recognition, and recognition by some powerful countries of that region could bring new recognition from other countries and regions,” Bokshi said. 
Kosovo has been recognised by 32 of 56 members of the Organisation of Islamic Co-operation and 11 of the 22 members of the Arab League. 
"Recognition by Turkey or recognition from Pakistan have not come as a result of religious proximity, but due to the interest that these countries [have] to the recognition of Kosovo as part of a more complex relationship to regional and international interests, e.g. proximity and interests that these countries have with the US," Bokshi said. 
BiH is divided when it comes to relations with the Middle East. Although the country has not conducted an official census since 1990, it is estimated that Muslims comprise about 45 percent of BiH's population. 
"There are two facts that term BiH's foreign policy towards the Middle East: the official policy of Sarajevo supports Muslim-oriented countries such as Iran and Palestine, while officials from Banja Luka orient themselves more to Israel," Milos Solaja, director of the Centre for International Relations in Banja Luka, told SETimes. 
"But these relations certainly do not have too much particular impact on the foreign policy of BiH. We saw the division of opinions in BiH in the vote for Palestine recognition in the United Nations in 2012, when BiH abstained," Solaja said. 
BiH has close relations with Turkey. Officials of both countries have stated on several occasions that they have shared common history, which represents a basis for future connections and relationships. 
Albania also abstained from last year's UN vote on recognising the Palestinian Territories. According to the 2012 census, 57 percent of Albanians are Muslims. Albania became an observer member of the Islamic Conference in 1991, right after the fall of communism. 
"Religion in Albania does not equal with the nation, as it happens in some Balkan countries. We have very correct relations with Middle East countries and there are efforts to grow economic collaboration. Albania does not have any influence in Arabian countries. If it had any the country would have used it for Kosovo recognition," Qazim Tepshi, a former Albanian diplomat, told SETimes. 
Ilir Kulla, a security policy expert and former chairman of Albania's State Committee on Cults, told SETimes that Turkey's policies under Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, who has emphasised establishing a commonwealth with neighbours, have helped advance Albania-Turkey relations. 
"Turkey has played a key role in Albanian foreign policy with Middle East countries and the strong position of Ankara government has affected Albanian decision-making in these relations. Despite religious closeness, we did not have a special relation with Middle East. Only in Turkey's case, Davutoglu doctrine suits to official politics in Tirana to strengthen Albania's role in Western Balkans," Kulla told SETimes. 
Correspondents Erl Murati in Tirana and Drazen Remikovic in Banja Luka contributed to this report. 
What steps should countries in the region take toward improving relations with the Middle East? Share your thoughts in the comments section. 
