14/12/2011
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 14/12/11
The Constitutional Court has overturned a package of privileges for MPs contained in the Law on Rights and Responsibilities. The court declared five articles of the law constitutionally incompatible on December 8th. All five involved generous supplemental privileges granted to retired lawmakers and their families. 
Under the law, lawmakers were entitled to supplementary pensions in the amount of 50, 60 and 70% of their actual salary, based on mandate terms, and effective at age 55. This scale, argued the court, set MPs' pensions at eight to ten times that of basic pensions funded by the state budget. 
"Such a disproportion concerning the retirement age, as well as the amount of pension compared to the basic pension, raises serious questions whether the assembly considered Articles 7, 3 and 24 of the Constitution of Kosovo when it enacted this law," the court said. Those articles state that the exercise of public authority must be based on the principles of equality. 
"It appears that the pensions to be paid to the retired deputies are distinctly disproportional with the average pensions in the country," argued the court, underlining that constitutional order is based on the principles of democracy, equality, non-discrimination and social justice. 
"The Constitutional Court, in its verdict, concludes that contested articles are not compatible with predispositions of Kosovo Constitution, and declared them null and void," Kosovo Ombudsperson Sami Kurteshi told SETimes. He welcomes the ruling, and credits the professionalism shown by his legal advisers in challenging the law. 
Also praising the court decision is Suzan Novoberdali, an MP from the ruling coalition's junior party, the Kosovo New Alliance (AKR). She told SETimes that pensions based on work experience and supplementary privileges should be addressed in another law. 
Special privileges for MPs, such as immunity and other privileges that defend and advance the position of elected representatives, should be regulated by law, she said. 
The Kosovo Democratic Institute, the NGO that first raised concerns over deputies' privileges, also welcomed the ruling. Programme Manager Driton Selmani told SETimes that his NGO considered that "the age and the level" of supplemental pensions afforded MPs was "unconstitutional and completely against the social and economic position of Kosovo, as well as discriminatory to other employees in the country". 
In June 2010, the bill on privileges managed to galvanise teamwork by the ruling coalition and opposition bloc, and it passed by a vote of 74-2, with two abstentions. This, despite OSCE warnings that the supplementary pension provisions were excessive and would heavily burden the budget. 
Beyond that, then-President Fatmir Sejdiu ignored an NGO request, initiated by the Kosovo Democratic Institute, not to promulgate the law. 
Encouraged by various NGOs, Ombudsman Kurteshi filed the case with the Constitutional Court. For him the law enabled "deputies of the Kosovo Assembly to realise pensions that are more favourable than any other pension benefit for other citizens, and that are inconsistent with constitutional principles of equality, rule of law, non-discrimination and social justice". 
To Selmani, the ruling is another feather in the cap of Kosovo's top court. It "proves our stance on this issue and makes us believe in the institution mandated to safeguard constitutionality and law and order in the country," he said. 
