27/12/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 27/12/11
Only 6% of children in elementary schools and 23% of high school students in Serbia have never experienced any kind of peer violence or abuse, according to the latest Ombudsperson report. 
Verbal abuse is the most frequent problem, but other forms of psychological violence – including malicious gossip, insults and ostracism – are common as well, the report found. In addition, many students encounter coercion and blackmail, have their property seized or damaged, or face weapons threats or sexual harassment. 
"Violence is an increasingly frequent occurrence in Serbia’s schools. The education ministry is putting together a database of all reported cases, data is being gathered and analysed and will be unveiled soon," Education Inspectorate chief Velimir Tmusic told SETimes. 
In a bid to provide affected students with recourse, the Education Ministry in early December set up the nation's first hotline for reporting cases of school violence. On the very first day, sixteen children and concerned parents dialled up the number -- 0800/200201. 
Education and Science Minister Zarko Obradovic says victims and witnesses should not hesitate to use the hotline – and he guarantees that their anonymity will be protected. 
"Our aim is to stop violence in schools, to root it out and create conditions for the students’ safe learning," Obradovic said. 
Drinka Pavlovic Elementary School has 900 students and is located in downtown Belgrade. School principal Milena Bicanin told SETimes there were no drastic cases of violence at the school, though minor incidents occur now and then. 
The most frequent problems, the principal said, are verbal insults and a growing number of conflicts on Facebook. 
"There have been reports of violence on Facebook. At first it all starts as a game and communication runs wonderfully between all involved, and then certain friendships are disrupted and Facebook turns into a means of tarnishing someone's integrity," Bicanin said. 
Another form of verbal violence is the sending of mean, inappropriate and disturbing SMS text messages. "There are no fist fights, there are arguments between friends. Verbal violence, insults and exclusion from the class are the most dominant forms. There is usually one leader in the class who rules everyone else, and sometimes those who are in any way different are simply excluded from communication," Bicanin explains. 
The school has its own anti-violence team and those entering the school building are greeted with a visible list of rules of conduct. Students likely benefitted from the school's participation in the UNICEF "Violence-Free Schools" project, Bicanin added. 
Although there are no reports of organised fights, disciplinary proceedings are in progress against three boys from this school over what the principal describes as "a very strange game". 
"They were allegedly playing in the school restroom by hitting each other. They claim this game is going on in all Belgrade schools and that it is not a form of hostility. We notified the parents, because I find that kind of play absolutely inappropriate. These children are now under increased supervision and educational treatment," Bicanin said. 
She underscores that parents are a very important link in the chain of anti-violence action in schools. Some of them co-operate, acknowledge the problem and work with their children, while others refuse to accept their own and their children’s responsibility, Bicanin says. 
A sixth grade student at Drinka Pavlovic told SETimes that communications are mostly positive, but disagreements flare up from time to time. 
"We usually spend good times together, but the most dangerous situation is when we insult each other verbally. We discuss something and then it turns into an argument," the student said. 
