04/07/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 04/07/05
Since 1 July, Romanians have been carrying two types of currency in their wallets: the existing Romanian leu (ROL) and its successor, nicknamed the "heavy leu" (RON). A RON is worth 10,000 ROL, and will replace the old currency by the end of 2006. 
"The new currency marks the end of an inflationist cycle and the beginning of an era of more stable prices, simplifies the adoption of euro, which we hope to happen in 2012-2014, and eases the understanding of the monetary values," said Mugur Isarescu, the governor of the Romanian National Bank (BNR), during a press conference. 
A new denomination -- the 500 RON note, equal to about $166 -- has been introduced. The ban coin, a subdivision of the leu, has been returned to circulation. The RON notes have the same dimensions as the euro, and officials hope they will ease the way towards the eventual introduction of that currency after Romania's entry into the Union. 
The switch presents numerous challenges for Romania's banking system. Financial institutions have had to invest in new software, purchase new coin-counting machines and change some ATM components. Dan Pascariu, the president of HVB Romania, is unhappy with the 18-month period during which the two currencies will circulate together. It is "too long and will make our mission more difficult," he says. 
Others, like Raiffeisen Bank Romania president Steven van Groningen, say the costs for banks will be higher than the BNR has projected. 
In the end, though, it is ordinary people who are the most affected. Many have yet to master the conversion of prices or salaries. "I'm not used to the new money yet. I will probably use the old currency when talking about prices for a long time after 1 July," says Elena Pop, 65, a retired secretary. 
Others wonder about the psychological effect of those disappearing zeroes. "When I see something that costs 100 RON, I instantly think it's very cheap, but then I realise it's in fact 1,000,000 ROL -- 10 per cent of my monthly wage," explains plumber Tudor Turculet, 36. 
The confusion is especially pronounced in rural areas. Some villagers believe that everything will be cheaper after the denomination, while others are afraid they will be allowed to exchange only a small amount of the old currency into the new one. "I remember in 1952 people were burning sacks full of money in the ovens because the banks refused to exchange big sums," recalls Dumitru Balus, 83, a villager from eastern Romania, about the last denomination. 
Experts say that there are in fact risks involved with changing the currency. Retailers could use the conversion as a pretext for raising prices, they say, citing what happened following Western Europe's changeover to the euro. 
Officials, however, are dismissing this possibility. "We've noticed the prices were indeed rounded off, but in many cases this made them smaller than before", said Isarescu. 
