13/09/2005
By Antonela Arhin for Southeast European Times – 13/09/05
One of the world's leading educational institutions in the field of public relations has established a presence in Montenegro. On Monday (12 September), a four-day training course offered by the London School of Public Relations and Branding (LSPR) got under way in Budva. 
The programme is primarily intended for representatives of public relations departments and directors of marketing. Participants come from private firms, local and state administration, the government and NGOs. 
Public relations education is also seen as a key part of boosting tourism -- a priority area for Montenegro, according to Tourism Minister Predrag Nenezic. The LSPR course has been scheduled to coincide with the summer tourism season at one of the republic's most popular destinations. 
Participants will receive internationally recognised public relations diplomas upon completing the course. The curriculum is mostly practical, relying on the professional experience of the lecturers -- who come from Croatia, Serbia-Montenegro, Slovenia and the United Kingdom -- rather than on theory. Ideally, participants will be able to apply what they learn to their respective areas of work without delay. 
The course will wrap up with a discussion on communications standards in government institutions, to be held on 16 September at the Hotel Avala in Budva. 
The LSPR, part of the David Game Media Group, has been in existence since 1992. Well-established in the United Kingdom, it also bills itself as the "largest independent educational training provider in public relations, with significant recognition in over 10 countries," according to the company Web site. Through its international network, it has agreements and franchise operations in Bulgaria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Czech Republic, India, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Poland, Russia, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, Turkey, Thailand, and the United States. 
The course in Montenegro is being co-organised by the MacCann Erickson Group's Serbia-Montenegro affiliate, Slovenia's SPEM Communication Group and the Bosnian firm ENI Marketing. 
