29/10/2009
By Baris Yilmaz for Southeast European Times -- 29/10/09
Earlier this month, the European Commission (EC) released its 2009 Progress Report for Turkey. With Turkish society deeply polarised over the controversial Ergenekon probe, the assessment from Brussels was highly anticipated. Many hoped the report would provide an objective view of the case. 
Since 2008, around 100 suspects have been charged with involvement in an alleged plot to overthrow the government of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his moderately Islamist Justice and Development Party. Retired generals, prominent critical writers and politicians are among those charged. 
Critics, however, argue that the government is using the investigation to stamp out the secularist opposition. 
In its report, the EC highlighted the inquiry's significance, describing it as "the most extensive investigation ever into an alleged criminal network aiming at destabilising the democratic institutions". But it also voiced concerns about a lack of effective judicial protection for the suspects. 
"This case is an opportunity for Turkey to strengthen confidence in the proper functioning of its democratic institutions and the rule of law. It is important that proceedings in this context fully respect the due process of law, in particular the rights of the defendants," Brussels said. 
Media freedom and democracy were a major focus of the report, which also praised Ankara for positive moves in regional diplomacy and efforts to address Kurdish grievances. 
The EC highlighted what it said are growing political pressures on the media, citing a massive penalty handed down against the country's largest media holding company, Dogan. Newspapers owned by the group have reported extensively on corruption cases involving the ruling party, and some say the record fines -- totalling $3.3 billion -- amount to political payback. 
"The high fines imposed by the revenue authority potentially undermine the economic viability of the [Dogan] group, and therefore affect freedom of the press in practice," the EC said. "There is a need to uphold the principles of proportionality and of fairness in these tax-related procedures." 
More generally, Brussels took aim at the remaining legal restrictions in Turkey that limit press freedom. The legal framework, it said, still fails to provide sufficient guarantees and is often interpreted in a restrictive way by public prosecutors and judges. 
The report also criticised the military for meddling in politics, saying the armed forces continue to exercise influence via formal and informal mechanisms, and said gender equality in Turkey remains a major challenge. Political representation of women is low, access to education remains unequal, and abuses such as forced marriages and honour killings are continuing problems, it said. 
Along with the criticism, however, came praise, especially for Turkey's foreign policy initiatives and its efforts to reach out to Kurds. 
"The visit of the president to Iraq and the Turkish rapprochement with the Kurdish Regional Government contributed to creating a positive atmosphere around a possible solution to the Kurdish issue," the report said. "A vibrant domestic debate developed on this subject, involving public and political authorities, including the opposition and civil society." 
The EC also praised the recent historic agreements between Turkey and Armenia as a move towards normalising diplomatic ties. 
Significantly, the report did not raise the possibility of sanctions against Turkey for failing to open its ports and airports to traffic from the Republic of Cyprus, as called for in a customs deal between Ankara and the bloc. Although it described the issue as "urgent", the EC refrained from mentioning any specific penalties, while also noting Turkey's public support for negotiations on reuniting Cyprus. 
The issue has been a major obstacle on Turkey's EU path, with the country facing the possibility that its accession talks will be suspended altogether at the end of the year if the impasse over the customs deal is not resolved. Although the talks started in 2005, only 11 of the 35 necessary chapters have been opened, and only one has been completed. 
