25/02/2009
(Javno - 25/02/09; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, Euobserver, Makfax - 24/02/09; European Voice - 20/02/09)
Croatia and Slovenia failed on Tuesday (February 24th) to bridge their differences on a lingering border dispute that is threatening to tear up Zagreb's EU road map. 
The issue was the reason for talks between the prime ministers of the two former Yugoslav republics, who met for the first time since Borut Pahor took over Slovenia's centre-left coalition government in November. 
The meeting itself was "a step forward," Pahor said after his hour-long session with Croatian counterpart Ivo Sanader in the small border town of Mokrice, Slovenia. 
Pahor warned, however, that Ljubljana would continue blocking Zagreb's EU entry talks until the neighbours reach a settlement. 
"Slovenia will not lift its veto on Croatia's accession talks unless there is progress in resolving the border issue," said Pahor, noting there would be more high-level talks in the future. 
Croatia began its membership negotiations with the EU in October 2005 and hopes to join the 27-nation bloc by 2011. 
In December, Slovenia blocked Croatia's accession talks with the Union over the dispute, which dates back to the dissolution of Yugoslavia in 1991. Ljubljana has blocked Zagreb from completing 11 out of the 35 policy areas that candidate countries must successfully negotiate to enter the Union. 
Analysts believe Croatia's chances of completing its EU talks by the end of this year will be slim if the two sides do not reach an agreement within the coming weeks. 
Croatia insists the border dispute is a bilateral issue and has no place in its accession process, all the more because it did not prevent Slovenia from joining the EU in 2004. While welcoming the European Commission's (EC) offer to help find an answer, Zagreb believes that the matter belongs in court, preferably, the International Court of Justice in The Hague. 
"We want to resolve the dispute as soon as possible, but it cannot be a condition for our EU talks," Sanader said on Tuesday. "I think an international court is the best solution." 
Slovenia opposes that option, saying it will accept the offer made by the EC. Brussels has asked former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, the winner of the 2008 Nobel Peace Prize, to mediate. 
Meanwhile, the row over EU membership now threatens to jeopardise Croatia's prospects of becoming a full-fledged member of NATO in early April. The Slovenian parliament ratified Zagreb's accession protocol with the 26-nation Alliance last week. But a non-parliamentary Slovenian nationalist group immediately called for a referendum on Croatia's NATO bid, insisting the unresolved dispute justifies blocking its Alliance membership. 
