18/08/2009
(Sofia Echo, Novinite, Dnevnik, Mediafax, Romanian Times, Nine O'clock - 17/08/09; Dnevnik-- 09/08/09 - 10/08/09; Novinite - 07/08/09; Dnevnik - 25/02/09)
According to media reports Monday (August 17th), a new ferry line running across the Danube River, will link Nikopol in Bulgaria to Turnu Magurele in Romania. 
The line is scheduled to kick off in October, following the completion of a stretch of road between Nikopol and Pleven, according to Nikopol Mayor Valeriy Zhelyazkov. 
"We are ready to launch the ferry once the road Nikopol-Pleven is completed," he told Bulgaria's state news agency, BTA, adding that this was expected to happen by the end of September. 
Two boats will make 12 round-trips daily, carrying up to six heavy and 30 light vehicles. The trip will last about ten minutes. 
 Bulgaria and Romania agreed to build the Nikopol-Turnu Magurele ferryboat complex back in 2004, but it took months before construction began. The project cost about 5m euros, 70% of which was provided by the EU under its PHARE programme for trans-border co-operation. 
The project was initially scheduled to be completed in autumn 2006, but various obstacles, such as high water levels on the Danube, caused construction to be halted. 
The three ferryboat lines already operating between the two countries are the Vidin-Calafat, Silistra-Calarasi and Oryahovo-Bechet. A fifth line may eventually be put in place between the town of Lom in Bulgaria and Rastu in Romania, according to reports. 
The two EU member states are currently connected by the Ruse-Giurgiu bridge. Efforts to build a second bridge at Vidin-Calafat have faced numerous delays. 
The 2km facility, a key element of a European transport corridor linking Dresden, Germany, to Istanbul, Turkey, is to be completed next year. 
Romania and Bulgaria signed an agreement on the construction of the so-called Danube Bridge 2 back in March 2000. Sofia and Bucharest later said they would provide 61m euros and 48m euros, respectively, for the implementation of the 230m-euro project. 
Under a memorandum signed in 2005, the European Commission agreed to contribute 70m euros under its ISPA programme for the initiative. The rest of the funding comes from loans and grants from the European Investment Bank, the French Development Agency and the German Credit Institution for Reconstruction and Development. 
The Bulgarian transport ministry said earlier this month that it will request a one-year extension of the end-2010 deadline for the absorption of aid provided to the country under the ISPA programme after new EU commissioners are appointed this autumn. 
"The building of the bridge is lagging behind schedule by 12-14 months," Bulgarian Deputy Transport Minister Ivaylo Moskovski, who will monitor all projects financed under EU programmes, said on August 7th. 
Bulgaria has utilised only 38% of a total 1.6 billion euros of ISPA funding available to it through the end of 2010. 
