08/06/2004
(The Washington Times, Big News Network - 08/06/04; AP, Reuters, BBC, Bloomberg - 07/06/04)
All preparations for the Summer Olympics are on track, Athens Mayor Dora Bakoyanni said in Washington on Monday (7 June), 67 days before the official start of the Games. She voiced confidence that the security plan put in place will ensure the safety of this year's biggest sports event.
"We believe whatever can be done as preparations for security, we did it, and we hope everything will go well," Bakoyanni said at the Western Policy Centre, which hosted a special forum on the Athens Olympics on Monday. "In this insecure world, Athens will probably be the most secure city in August 2004."
Greece has allocated a budget of nearly 6.9 billion euros to prepare for the two-week Games, which open on 13 August. Of that amount, a record 1 billion euros have been earmarked for the biggest ever-Olympic security plan.
The AP quoted her as saying 95 per cent of the sports venues are now ready. The projects that still need to be finished mostly involve landscaping. "The other things are on schedule and the International Olympic Committee (IOC) is happy with the way things are going," she said. IOC Co-ordinating Committee President Dennis Oswald echoed Bakoyanni's words in an interview for Sky Radio in Athens on Monday, saying that he is satisfied with the level of co-operation and that all projects would be completed on time.
Bakoyanni arrived on a two-day visit to the United States to review the security arrangements with State Department officials and lawmakers. Following talks with her on Monday, Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage expressed appreciation for Greece's close co-operation with international efforts to ensure a safe Olympics.
The United States is a member of a seven-nation advisory group that also includes Australia, Britain, France, Germany, Israel and Spain. The countries are assisting Greece in Olympic security preparations.
The Greek Ministry of Public Order is responsible for ensuring the safety of this first summer Olympics since the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States. A special unit has been put in place under the comprehensive security plan, which also envisions the deployment of up to 70,000 military, police and coastguard personnel. They will be backed NATO air and sea patrols.
Meanwhile, Greece's Olympic security team set out Monday on a four-day tour of the country, led by Public Order Minister George Voulgarakis. "The implementation of the [security] plan is starting now," Voulgarakis said in a statement. "We want to activate all procedures to take the country into the Olympic period proper."
Ahead of the Games, Greek officials have stepped up their co-operation with counterparts from neighbouring Bulgaria, Albania and Turkey to ensure that trafficking routes on both sides of the borders are sealed off.
