28/02/2012
By Ivana Jovanovic and Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 28/02/12
A total of ten young photographers -- five from Serbia and five of them from Kosovo -- are presenting their works related to the theme of the EU, the euro and European values. The exhibit opened at the National Library in Pristina earlier this month, and will move to Belgrade later in the year, though the date has not yet been confirmed. It will move beyond the region, to Tirol Austria, in late August, for the annual European Forum Alpbach. 
The exhibit, the brainchild of the Belgrade NGO Club Alpbach and Alpbach initiative groups from Kosovo, serves as a reminder that people in this region have much in common, despite the political and ethnic differences that drive them apart. 
Participants from Pristina and Belgrade were chosen as much for their skill as for their awareness of the need for co-operation and social responsibility. 
Each group packed their bags and went to the other's capital to attend mandatory workshops. There, they talked about tangible photography techniques as well as intangibles, such as the role of culture, cultural differences as driving forces of conflict, and overcoming conflict. Following the workshops, each was asked to take photos of their environments, capturing a symbolic use of the euro or of the EU. 
It was a unique opportunity -- providing unprecedented exposure. Belgrade photographer and law student Milena Gusevski, whose work is on exhibit in Pristina, told SETimes "I've never in my 26 years, met anyone who is Albanian. And I wanted to go there and see if someone will do something to me, but I saw that they were the same as we and that we even have the same fears. We are ... more similar than we are different." 
Philippe Narval, who is working on an external study about the impact of the European Forum, attended the opening in Pristina. He drew a comparison between the hard work demonstrated by the exhibit with the literal tough road that resulted from heavy snows and treacherous road conditions. 
"This journey to Pristina was almost symbolic for how difficult it must have been for all of them to take a big step out of their story, to listen to the other side and even more so, to build bridges in real life," Narval told SETimes. 
Taulant Hodaj, president of the Initiative Group Alpbach Kosovo, is happy with both the turnout and the reaction. "The opinions of the visitors in principle were all positive and encouraging for the co-operation and for the messages of the photographs," he told SETimes. 
Hodaj says there were a number of difficulties in organising such an exhibition, from choosing and convincing the photographers to co-operate in a joint project with photographers from Serbia to arranging the travel of the Kosovo photographers to Serbia. They required special permission because Serbia does not accept Kosovo documents. 
"The main intention of this exhibition has been to show that co-operation between certain parts of the societies of Kosovo and Serbia is possible. I am talking here about the co-operation of the young people of those countries through the messages of the photographs, which show that besides the ideological and political differences, these societies face the same problems and have the same aims. Therefore, co-operation is possible," Hodaj told SETimes. 
Arben Llapashtica, a photographer from Kosovo, told SETimes, "The photos show two sides of the coin, the positive and the critical elements, letting the viewer think and decide on his own where is Kosovo now, closer or further away from Europe." 
Korab Mushkolaj of Pristina was one of the visitors. The 30 photographs showed the reality in both countries, in Kosovo and Serbia, two realities in two Balkan countries, Mushkolaj told SETimes. 
"There are differences such as culture, mentality, the past, and other elements, but also the common intention, both states intend [to join] the EU. The photographers had been trying to show both, the common points and the differences between Kosovo and Serbia," Mushkolaj said. 
Two photos in particular caught his eye. "There was a photograph by a Serb photographer, showing a Serb citizen, protesting on the contrary side of the rest of the protesters who were all against Kosovo. This one protester was alone, holding a banner reading 'Albanians are our brothers'." 
"Another photo that also impressed me was by a Kosovo photographer, Berat Morina, showing a single policeman in front of the Kosovo government building. All the space around him and around the government building is covered with things thrown by protesters against the visit of the Serb head of the talks team, [Borislav] Stefanovic," Mushkolaj added. 
Llapashtica says the exhibition is unique. "Pristina and Belgrade met in one place, but now on a different scale, which is not political. When politics does not mingle, co-operation in the cultural and artistic level is fruitful, as testified with this project." 
He adds that the project also helped the photographers from Kosovo and Serbia break old prejudices and exchange professional expertise. "The mutual visits to Belgrade and Pristina and the joint topic we focused on played a key role," he said. 
"We have been focused on something that is common for both societies, and the aspirations for EU integration are." Milana Sredojevic, president of the Belgrade Club Alpbach, told SETimes. 
