04/03/2009
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 04/03/09
With Serbia battered by the global economic crisis and forced to adopt a tighter budget, the country's 1.6 million pensioners most likely will not receive an increase this year and may even see a pension cut. If monthly pensions remain at the current level in 2009, the lowest will amount to about 117.6 euros, with the average being around 235.2 euros. 
Pensioners have become accustomed to regular hikes in April and October, with the government indexing pensions to inflation. But it seems this will not happen in 2009. 
The bad news comes as elderly Serbians try to forget the deprivations of the 1990s. During the regime of Slobodan Milosevic, pensioners did not receive their cheques regularly and the state owed them large sums. Only last year did the state pay off the last of that debt. 
Many senior citizens fear the global economic crisis is about to inflict another round of suffering on them. Pensioners' associations have called on the government to index pensions to the projected inflation rate of 8% in 2009. 
Deputy Prime Minister Jovan Krkobabic has said the government will review its accounts every three months to see if there is money for a raise. 
The head of the Pension and Disability Insurance Fund, Goran Loncar, also tried to reassure retirees. "Pensioners really have no cause for concern, since the funds for the regular payment of pensions in 2009 have, for the most part, already been secured," he told Southeast European Times. 
National Bank of Serbia Governor Radovan Jelasic disagrees with Loncar, saying the frugal 2009 budget makes regular payments at the current level impossible. Instead, Jelasic argues, budget restrictions will force a pension reduction of approximately 5%. 
The state last raised pensions in October by 14.3%, a figure that included a special 10% increase above the rate of inflation. 
That extraordinary 10% increase, enacted to fulfill a campaign promise, did not sit well with the IMF. Serbia and the Fund negotiated a new arrangement in October, with the IMF insisting that Belgrade cut its budget. 
In acknowledgment of the Fund's wishes, Belgrade agreed to freeze pensions in 2009 unless it found enough money to increase them. Because of the austerity forced on the government, another campaign promise from 2008 will not see fruition. Politicians had vowed to have pensions reach 70% of the average salary, rather than the current 60%. Belgrade now says it is postponing rather than abandoning that idea. 
