30/01/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 30/01/06
Austria assumed the EU presidency from Britain on 1 January 2006. It was spared having to deal with the 2007-2013 EU budget, which its predecessor, Britian, managed to push through. Nevertheless, expectations for its presidency still run high, and challenges await. 
The country's six-month presidency should see completion of the so-called "period of reflection" that followed the EU's constitutional debacle. Some have described this period as an opportunity to decide fundamental questions about the bloc's future. In any case, the Austrian presidency will be expected to mediate the discussion over the EU's boundaries and the extent to which further enlargement should take place. This debate will reflect directly on the membership aspirations of SEE countries. 
 Initial signals coming from the Austrian presidency have given the Western Balkans cause for optimism. 
 "Increased stability and security in the Western Balkans is in Austria's and Europe's interest. We are doing everything in our power to bring the countries in this region closer to the EU and to support them on their path to reform. We do not want an area of insecurity and instability between Italy and Greece," Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik said at the start of the year. 
 "European prospects for the Balkans are a peaceful project of our generation," she added, pledging that Austria would seek to build "a common area of peace, security and prosperity with our neighbours in Eastern Europe and the Mediterranean". 
These and other remarks coming from Austrian leaders suggest that the country will likely continue the course followed by Britain during the previous six months. In other words, it will seek to address the bloc's internal problems and citizens' worries about where the EU is headed, while at the same time keeping the door open to the SEE. 
 Indeed, despite the hand-wringing that followed the constitutional and budgetary crises, the accession process moved forward during the British presidency. Croatia began its membership talks with the Union. The negotiations process kicked off for Turkey. Macedonia became an official candidate. Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn confirmed that Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) negotiations with Albania are nearly complete, and talks have begun with Serbia-Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
Continuity in the effort to approximate the Western Balkans to the EU is clearly evident in a key EC document, "Operational Programme of the Council for 2006 submitted by the incoming Austrian and Finnish Presidencies," issued on 22 December 2005. 
"The two presidencies have identified the following issues as matters of particular priority in 2006: the European Neighbourhood Policy, the Western Balkans, further development of the Enhanced Security Dialogue with the United States in combating terrorism and the continuation of implementation of the EU-US Declaration on Combating Terrorism," it reads. 
The paper sets forth specific guidelines concerning each of the candidate countries. For Bulgaria and Romania, it stipulates continued monitoring of the commitments made during accession negotiations, with the goal of bringing both countries into the Union in January 2007 as planned. Meanwhile, the initial negotiating chapters for Croatia and Turkey will be opened in accordance with the agreed framework. Each candidate country will be treated individually on its own merits. As regards to Macedonia, further progress of compliance with the Copenhagen political criteria and effective implementation of the SАА will be closely followed. 
The EU prospects for the Western Balkans will also be discussed at a key summit to be held in March, four months into the Austrian presidency. It will provide an important opportunity for EU foreign ministers to raise accession issues with their counterparts from the SEE, and vice versa. In an interview with the Austrian press, Rehn indicated that visa regime relief -- a top concern in the Balkan region -- could be put on the agenda, along with economic co-operation and other topics. 
All this suggests that the EU is doing its best to balance two imperatives. On the one hand, it has to engage the sceptics about enlargement; the signal sent by French and Dutch voters during the constitutional referenda shows that cautionary trends cannot simply be ignored. At the same time, however, it must not lose credibility by failing to fulfill what it pledged. The indications are that the EU will continue to press ahead with the agenda laid forth at the Zagreb and Thessaloniki summits. 
 In turn, however, SEE countries will be expected to take EU standards and membership conditions seriously and show a real commitment to meeting them. Macedonia, for instance, has been handed specific benchmarks it must achieve before negotiations can begin. It must conduct a fair and democratic election this autumn, free from irregularities that have marred past polls. Other Balkan countries that are just embarking on the process face years of tough work to bring about essential changes. 
