14/04/2010
(Reuters, AP, AFP, Beta, B92, Radio Srbija - 13/04/10)
Serbian President Boris Tadic said on Tuesday (April 13th) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) that Western Balkan countries must boost economic co-operation to deal with the impact of the global recession and achieve a common aim of joining the EU. 
Current challenges should be met with national and regional projects, noted Tadic at the opening of a five-day international economic fair in Mostar. The conference was organised by Serbia and BiH. 
 Continued fixation on divisive issues of the past -- particularly ethnic rivalries -- would only repel potential investors and slow regional progress towards EU integration, Tadic warned. He stressed that Western Balkan countries should instead employ common resources in the pursuit of the EU goal. 
 "One resource is that we all speak the same language, listen to the same music, live under the same sky, we have CEFTA (the Central European Free Trade Agreement), water courses and energy potential," said Tadic. "We should not be hostages of the past years and decades because no one will invest in a country living in the past, but in the region of the future." 
The EU, Tadic said, is watching Western Balkan nations to gauge the will and ability of their political and economic elites to co-operate. 
But Haris Silajdzic, the Bosniak member of BiH's tripartite presidency and its current chairman, does not believe his country's relations with Serbia can improve until problems stemming from their 1992-1995 conflict have been resolved. 
 "We have to use our similarities and contiguity to co-operate better but we must not push the problems from the past under the carpet," Silajdzic was quoted by Reuters as saying at opening ceremonies on Tuesday. "There have been some positive moves in relations with Serbia but some facts bring fear into the hearts of citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina." 
According to the AP, Silajdzic criticised Serbia for what he believed were politically motivated arrests of Bosnian nationals for alleged involvement in war crimes during the conflict between the two former Yugoslav republics in the early 1990s. 
Silajdzic cited the detention of Ejup Ganic, a former president of BiH's Muslim-Croat entity, the Federation of BiH, in London last month on a Serbian warrant. Such moves, said Silajdzic, impede reconciliation between the two countries. 
"Does this mean that those of us not ethnically cleansed [during the conflict] can now be hunted down in London, Belgrade and elsewhere?" the AP quoted Silajdzic as saying on Tuesday. 
The Mostar business fair is now more than a decade-old and one of the largest in the region, featuring more than 700 exhibitors from 40 countries this year. 
The opening ceremony was attended by a number of officials, including Serbian Economy Minister Mladan Dinkic and Croatian Parliament Vice-President Josip Friscic, as well as members of the BiH diplomatic corps. 
Later on Tuesday, Dinkic and BiH Foreign Trade and Economy Minister Mladen Zirojevic signed an agreement strengthening bilateral co-operation in tourism. Dinkic suggested that the BiH, Croatian and Serbian governments should hold joint sessions every three months to resolve lingering issues. 
