14/12/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 14/12/10
Croatian authorities officially requested the extradition of former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader from Austria on Monday (December 13th). Sanader, who was arrested near Salzburg last week, remains in custody. 
The official extradition process may take a few weeks. Croatian media speculate that Sanader will spend Christmas behind bars. 
Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor, once a close aide of Sanader, visited Austria on Monday, but declined to comment on the case. She added that her visit to Austria was scheduled months ahead of the event and had nothing to do with her predecessor's arrest. 
Commenting on Sanader's arrest earlier, Kosor said that "The constitution guarantees the rule of law and equality. We promote the independence of the judiciary and consider everyone innocent until proven guilty." 
Meanwhile, Croatian authorities blocked all Sanader's assets and accounts, Croatian State Attorney Mladen Bajic confirmed. 
Sanader's lawyer in Austria, Warner Suppan, said his client wants to return to Croatia as soon as possible to clarify things. 
The justice ministry in Zagreb confirmed that it has sent all the necessary documents to Austria for extradition. "We do not know when we'll receive a reply," ministry spokeswoman Vesna Dovranic said. 
 It took 19 months for Austria to extradite Vladimir Zagorec, a former high ranking defence ministry official who was charged with embezzlement and theft. 
Croatian reporters have set up a camp in front of the Salzburg prison since the former prime minister's arrest. He has not received any family visits yet. 
His wife Mirjana and younger daughter Bruna live in Zagreb, while his elder daughter Petra is studying in the United States. Family members have not commented on the arrest. But the public has. 
 "This is the ultimate proof that our country is fighting corruption. I mean, we have a number of former ministers and officials held in Remetinec Prison on corruption charges," said Ivica Ranic, a worker from Zagreb. 
"Politicians are all the same," said Zagreb's Jasna Matic. 
Sanader is the highest-ranking Croatian official being investigated for corruption. He fled the country late last week, but state authorities stripped him of immunity and issued an international warrant for his arrest. 
He appeared before a judge on Sunday, and said the charges against him are politically motivated. 
Sanader served as prime minister from 2004 to 2009, when he abruptly resigned. 
