08/02/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 08/02/07
Despite an appeal Monday (February 5th) by Macedonian Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, dialogue has not been restored between the ruling VMRO-DPMNE and the country's largest ethnic Albanian party, the Democratic Union for Integration (DUI). The country has come under criticism from both the United States and the EU for a breakdown in the political process. 
DUI's deputies have been boycotting Parliament since January 26th, charging that the government has been marginalising them and violating the so-called Badinter principle, under which some types of laws need approval by a specified minimum of minority party MPs before they can be adopted. 
The DUI has said it will not consider resuming talks until the government reconsiders the composition of its ethnic relations commission -- something the Gruevski administration has so far refused to do. 
The administration has launched a campaign to try to assure the international community that political dialogue exists, or at least that this should not be an area of concern. Earlier this week Gruevski sent a letter to DUI head Ali Ahmeti, expressing his readiness to meet him face to face and pledging the sincerity of his intentions. 
So far there has been no sign of a thaw. However, Gruevski has been able to restore dialogue between his VMRO-DPMNE and the main opposition party, the Social Democrats. 
On February 2nd, officials from the two parties began talks on two proposals included in the government agenda and opposed by the Social Democrats. The first is the introduction of compulsory secondary education. The second is the opening of polling places in foreign countries, allowing approximately 1 million Macedonian nationals to exercise their right to vote without coming to Macedonia. 
Both ideas require changes in the constitution, and a two-thirds majority in Parliament. The ruling parties have 72 members there, and a two-thirds majority requires 80 votes. 
Neither compulsory secondary education nor voting abroad is needed to meet the preconditions for NATO and EU membership. However, a number of other sizeable policy projects are required, and will demand a broad political consensus for implementation. 
The government needs opposition support to push through new laws on public prosecution, the introduction of private schools in primary education, a new election code, a new parliamentary rulebook, and renaming the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia. 
While co-operation with the Social Democrats is a step forward, the administration still faces a hurdle when it comes to legislation requiring the Badinter principle. These include laws on minority languages and on selection of Judiciary Council members. 
