25/03/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 25/03/10
 Ilir Meta serves as the foreign minister and the deputy prime minister of Albania. In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Meta said Albania is committed to its role as a stabilising force in Southeast Europe. 
 SETimes: Albanian foreign policy is respected for helping bring stability to the region. How do you see future developments from the perspective of Albanian foreign policy? 
 Ilir Meta: Albania is determined to strengthen its stabilizing and moderator role in the region, as a NATO member country, which adds more of its responsibilities to the peace and the security in the region… [Albania] wants to become an EU member as soon as possible, but despite the rhythm and the quality of the internal reforms, it also depends a lot on the further improvement of some regional relations, which are still tense. 
 SETimes: What do you mean by "tense"? 
 Meta: Relations between Serbia and Kosovo concerning issues of a practical [nature], which is the main interest of Kosovo citizens. 
These relations should further improve towards the Kosovo Serbs, especially in the north, enabling them to be involved in different institutions and contributing also to their security and prosperity. 
 It's also important to find a solution for the Macedonia name issue as soon as possible on the basis of the two countries' [Macedonia and Greece] goodwill and the mediation of the special UN Envoy. 
The improvement of the rights of the Albanians in the Preshevo Valley remains important for us, not only as an ethnic issue, but also as a problem of a regional character -- the resolution of which would indirectly help the interethnic atmosphere in Kosovo. 
The further consolidation of interethnic relations in Bosnia and Herzegovina is very welcome and would help the country get the Membership Action Plan (MAP) to speed up its EU integration process. 
  SETimes: Albania has been an important factor for Kosovo on its way to becoming an independent state. What is the relationship between Albania and Kosovo now? 
 Meta: Relations between Albania and Kosovo are excellent and will continue to extend in all fields. Putting the highway in [operation] within a few months will bring a very tangible result in the two countries' economic, political and cultural ties. Albania has been and will remain one of the most determined supporters of the independence and the new state of Kosovo and it will continue its attempts to have more international recognition of it. 
But Albania also supports the realization of a European Kosovo, to which nobody can object. Interethnic co-existence and improvement of interethnic relations there are the basis for this European Kosovo. 
That's why we have undertaken concrete initiatives supporting the integration of the Serb community in Kosovo institutions and [daily] Kosovo life. Our government has financed some projects -- costing about 400,000 euros -- in the Serb-majority municipality of Gracanica. 
 SETimes: Are relations between Albania and its neighbors consolidated or can we expect more developments? 
 Meta: There is no argument about the fact that Albania's good neighborhood and regional co-operation policy has been consolidated for years now. But of course we intend to make it more active and enrich it with new developments, especially with regard to Serbia. 
We want to make relations with Serbia more dynamic. We also want to move to a higher level of relations with Bosnia-Herzegovina, keeping in mind also the latest decision of the Albanian government to open an embassy in Sarajevo and to be represented there in the ambassadorial level. 
 SETimes: You are the first senior Albanian official to visit Serbia and its Preshevo Valley. How do you see relations between Albania and Serbia? 
 Meta: My last visit in Belgrade had a special importance. It was really the first visit by an Albanian government member since the secession of Montenegro and the formation of the Republic of Serbia. It was the first visit after the proclamation of Kosovo independence. It was very important in terms of meeting the Albanian ethnic minority in Preshevo Valley, the first visit of this kind in the history of the relations between Albania and Serbia. 
 When I talk about a more dynamic relation with Serbia, I have in mind that we have a lot of room to grow when it comes to mutual co-operation on the economy, trade, education and other fields. Development in our relations would be the step forward to the regional cooperation and to the European integration. 
 SETimes: Does Serbia have the same political will? 
Meta: We believe that this visit will continue to provide results. And we have agreed that despite our different positions regarding Kosovo independence, we should move forward. 
 SETimes: In an upcoming census, Albanians will be able to declare not only their citizenship, but nationality and the religion. There has been a hot debate in Albania on this issue. You have said the new census will be transparent and based on EU standards. Can you give more details? 
 Meta: In the Balkans, all nations are made up of majorities and minorities. The only way to fix minority problems is to follow European standards. Albania is a democratic country, a NATO member with a clear intention of becoming an EU member. Taken from this perspective, Albania cannot deny the expression of the ethnic background of each of its citizens, because that would be neither democratic nor European. 
There has been a claim raised by the Serbian foreign minister, Mr. Jeremic, concerning the existence of a Serb minority in Albania, and of course some here would like to hear a strong, harsh and "Balkan-style" reply, which is not going to happen. The answers I gave in Belgrade are the most reasonable and transparent possible. 
 SETimes: Your left-leaning party is the main partner in the governing coalition. Yet, the leftist opposition continues to insist on opening the June 2009 election ballot boxes. How comfortable are you with this coalition? 
 Meta: Although something new in the Albanian politics, the coalition in general functions in a very correct and stable way and with goodwill from both sides. As for the behaviour of the Socialist Party, which is unfortunately not constructive ... I and the party I lead do not believe that the [Socialist] leadership is concerned about the election standards. 
 Socialist Party Chairman Edi Rama was the man whose idea [established] the electoral code and the elections administration. He even gave his consensus for members of the electoral court, according to the electoral code. 
Not only that, but he even violated some democratic standards with the conditions he put to the majority, one of which was to discriminate against the party I represent -- which was excluded from all the election administration, even though it was and is the third main political force in the country. 
 The majority has offered all facilities related to the most divisive issue until now, namely, the opening or not opening of the ballot boxes. Our position is very constructive. If they bring a confirmation from the constitutional court that this action is in accordance with the constitution and does not [compromise] the independence of the courts, which have voiced their view on the elections, we would take this into consideration. 
Meanwhile, we have invited them to take the leadership in amendments and electoral reform for the sake of higher standards in future elections. 
 SETimes: What developments have come about as a result of joining NATO? 
Meta: Relations are very good. Albania has more responsibilities now, including additional responsibilities in Afghanistan. We will fulfill all our obligations that come from our membership in the Alliance. 
 SETimes: How strong are the chances for EU membership and visa liberalisation? 
 Meta: Within this year, the decision for visa liberalisation in Albania should be taken. We have EU guidelines for liberalisation and Albania has met all the legal and technical conditions to grant this right to its citizens. It is clear that the process depends on the principle of "strict and fair" and is not related to political issues. 
Concerning EU membership, this will be a longer process. It will take time for Albania to fulfill all criteria and standards, and the EU should also show its readiness to welcome new members, including Albania in the future. We are in close dialogue and co-operation with the European Commission, the European Parliament and all EU institutions and member countries. For now, we are completing our answers to the EU questionnaire, to be delivered to Brussels within some weeks. 
