15/03/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/03/10
Bratislav Nikolic is the mayor of Strpce, a southern Kosovo town widely known for its famous ski-resort Brezovica. Nikolic was elected in the second round of the 2009 local run-off last December. 
It is Nikolic's vision to power Strpce's economic development through the Brezovica ski resort, while at the same time transforming the town into a successfully integrated multi-ethnic municipality. 
He discussed those plans in a recent interview with SETimes. 
 SETimes: How did you decide to run for mayor? 
 Bratislav Nikolic: After working for different international organisations, I realised I could do something for my hometown. It was a big challenge and a lot of work, but for a young man like me, it was not that difficult. 
 SETimes: Why do you think the Serbs of Strpce supported you? 
 Nikolic: Ordinary people in Strpce recognise in me a new, young politician ready to make changes in our municipality. I am assembling a team of well known and respected people. Therefore, the result was receiving over 4,000 votes [65% of the total] in the second round of elections. 
 SETimes: There are Serbs, such as Zvonko Mihajlovic, who say you assumed office illegally by taking over the municipal office without a proper vote. 
 Nikolic: We didn't take office from anyone. The whole process of taking over offices that belonged to legally elected municipality officials from the Serbian Radical Party was done in the presence of a commission of three people. This was after an official request from my side to release offices that now belong to the newly elected Strpce municipality government. 
 SETimes: What are the main problems facing the people of Strpce? 
 Nikolic: Unemployment and the economy, for sure. I believe that by implementing new projects and carrying out a successful privatisation of the [Brezovica] ski center, we can resolve most of the problems. 
 SETimes: Is it possible to separate politics from the daily problems? 
 Nikolic: That is my goal. I am not a person that looks to the past. My vision for success for the future is to live with our neighbours on good terms and to have good economics in our municipality. Strpce will be the best example of a multiethnic municipality in Kosovo. 
 SETimes: How much support do you get from the Kosovo government? 
 Nikolic: Currently, I am satisfied. I can't complain. 
 SETimes: How relevant is Belgrade government influence in Strpce? 
Nikolic: I believe that the people of Strpce realise their town is the place where decisions should be made, not in Belgrade or Pristina. We need to take destiny in our own hands. Anyone who wishes good to the people in Strpce is welcome. 
 SETimes: How are you going to solve the problem of the Belgrade-supported parallel structures? 
 Nikolic: In my opinion, the problem was solved the day when I got the offices back from them. The international community allowed elections in May 2008 and we can't ignore the results. It is more a problem for the international community. 
 SETimes: How do you see the future of the Serb community in Kosovo? Nikolic: We need to respect the Serbs' faith and traditions; support [their role] economic development and we can integrate. 
 SETimes: Should the Serbs strengthen their own Kosovo Serb political parties? 
 Nikolic: The Independent Liberal Party is one of the few Serbian political parties operating only in Kosovo, the only one that cares about the future of all Kosovo Serbs. The results of the local elections are proof that we have large support. 
