24/05/2012
By Misko Taleski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 24/05/12
A growing chorus of people wants Macedonia to withdraw from the UN-brokered negotiations with Greece over the name issue, following NATO's decision not to extend membership to Skopje. 
Alliance members agreed at the Chicago summit this week that "a mutually acceptable solution to the name issue reached within the framework of the UN" is a new pre-condition for Macedonia's membership. 
But since 2008, Greece has ignored its own obligations under that framework, according to Meto Koloski, president of the United Macedonian Diaspora. The new condition implies that the only way forward for Macedonia is to negate its own identity, he said. 
"The US, France and Germany have officially chosen to ignore the December 2011 International Court of Justice ruling, which declared the Greek veto illegal under the 1995 Interim Accord between Macedonia and Greece; a UN-brokered agreement signed by both states, but which -- according to a few NATO states -- is only binding on Macedonia," Koloski added. 
Analysts said the name dispute is a roundabout way for Greece to express its problem with the existence of the Macedonian people and Macedonia as a state. 
"The name dispute was invented ... to prevent Macedonia [from becoming] an independent state," Toni Deskoski, professor of international law at the Law Faculty in Skopje, told SETimes. 
The issue surfaced during the Balkan wars in the 1990s. To become a UN member then, Macedonia was subjected to extra-judicial demands outside the scope of the UN Charter, according to Todor Petrov, president of the Macedonian World Congress. 
As a consequence, Macedonia became a UN member in 1993 -- under a "temporary reference" of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia -- and was subjected to talks with Greece to resolve the differences about the name. 
"Thus, Greece used the name 'dispute' to tie Macedonia up at the UN, force concessions such as changing Macedonia's flag and constitution, and use the gains at the UN process to follow with blockades internationally, most notably at the EU and now at NATO," Petrov told SETimes. 
Macedonians say anything but the name "Republic of Macedonia" denies the nation's right of identity. Greece has said the name is an implied threat towards its province of the same name. 
The UN talks on the name, however, evolved into negotiations about changing Macedonia's name as well as identity, according to Mirka Velinovska, a columnist at the daily Nova Makedonija. 
"Ambassador Matthew Nimetz brought proposals to add a qualifier to the name 'Macedonia,' but each time accompanied with many pages of small print which denied Macedonia's language, culture and identity," Velinovska told SETimes. 
"But UN Resolution 817 clearly states that the talks are about changing the temporary reference and about nothing else," Dimitar Mirchev, a former ambassador and senior adviser to Macedonia's president, told SETimes. 
"Changing Macedonia's name is not only a violation of a fundamental right to identity enshrined in all basic UN documents, but also a threat to the region's security because Macedonia's neighbours' territorial aspirations have never ceased. That fact should be foremost on the minds of NATO leaders," Mirchev said. 
Petrov has long advocated that Macedonia has only one option to survive. "Macedonia must end right away the 'name negotiations' process and any other concessions within the 1995 interim accord with Greece," he said. 
"President [Georgi] Ivanov should, immediately and without reservation, inform the UN secretary-general that despite Macedonia's goodwill, the differences with Greece remain, and the country will continue its UN membership under its one and only, historical name -- Macedonia." 
