30/09/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 30/09/09 
Great films don't always have to be long. In fact, as the annual Filminute festival demonstrates, they can be shorter than the time it takes to boil an egg. 
The festival, which wraps up voting on Wednesday (September 30th), aims to "present, promote and award the best one-minute narrative films from around the world", according to organisers. 
This is not an event that requires an admission ticket or an expensive plane ticket. Film buffs from around the world can participate just by visiting the festival's website. There they can view -- and vote for -- entries via an online screening room. 
"Audiences love Filminute," says the festival's executive director, John Ketchum. "This year, the average rating for the entire collection is 4.4 (out of a possible 5 stars). This average rating has been generated by participation from 115 countries so far. That's a very high rating and reflects the quality of the work that Filminute is screening." 
Although viewers range from teenagers to septuagenarians, the films most strongly appeal to the 18- to 34-year-old demographic. It's an educated, web-savvy crowd, one that spends much more time in front of the computer than watching TV or going to the cinema. 
Awards for this year's installment will be announced October 8th. Winners of the Best Filminute and People's Choice awards will receive a glass trophy. But the more important reward, Ketchum says, comes in the form of massive audience exposure. 
Their short running time makes the films ideal for distribution across digital media as well as the more traditional outlets for cinema. Even a cell phone can become a miniature movie screen. 
"Our total audience across all media … matches the largest film festivals in the world," Ketchum says. 
Filmmakers also get the chance to have their work seen by a high-calibre, international jury. Moreover, the festival organises live events each year in cities around the world, including Bucharest, London and Toronto. 
"As the festival continues to grow, we expect more and more of our shortlisted filmmakers to find their opportunities in the world of film, greatly expanded as the result of making the annual shortlist," Ketchum says. 
Southeast European countries have provided more Filminute entries than any other area in the world. A Romanian film, "Line", won the festival's top honour in 2006. A Bulgarian film, "Game", won it in 2007. 
Serbian and Romanian films have received jury commendations, and the festival has shortlisted entries from Croatia, Greece, Macedonia, Montenegro and Turkey. 
The history of one minute films goes back to the Lumière brothers and Edison, both working in the waning years of the 19th Century. These films fascinated audiences for a number of years before the lack of narrative made them redundant. 
The genre made a triumphant return with Ridley Scott's "1984", which was used as part of the product launch for the Macintosh computer. Still considered a classic, it was a major influence on the development of Filminute, Ketchum explains. 
