02/11/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 02/11/11 
Vlada Jelic, the owner of a Belgrade print shop that provides income for his family and five other workers, worries while looking at the business books. 
"When I took out a loan to buy the machines in 2008, a euro was worth 84 dinars. Now a euro is worth 100 dinars, so you can see how much money I'm losing just on account of the difference I'm paying for the loan installment," Jelic told SETimes. 
He says he will soon have to dismiss one of his workers if the country's financial situation does not improve. 
Branislav Jovanovic, owner of a family advertising signs company, has a similar business experience. 
"There is a fee one has to pay for placing the company sign outside its headquarters. I work in a small rented space with no room outside for me to set up the sign. However, I still have to pay that fee, because they would otherwise fine me," Jovanovic told SETimes. 
He also complains about business conditions. "On paper, I’m doing well, but what good is it when I cannot charge for my work? A man owing me money recently told me he could give me 500 bottles of water as compensation, because his bank account is in the red. What am I supposed to do with that water? If I sue him, the case will take years," said Jovanovic. 
Vladimir Gavranovic, who works at medical device company, also sees a problem with collecting payment. 
"We work with state hospitals. If the state does not pay the hospitals, they do not have any funds to pay us either, and then we cannot purchase new devices. That circle has to be broken," he told SETimes. 
Milan Knezevic from the Association of SMEs said companies encounter several basic problems in their operations. 
"They are primarily the gray economy, non-liquid, because the state owes the economy 1.4 billion euros, lack of structural reforms, high taxes and fees," Knezevic told SETimes. 
"Out of the 106,000 [SMEs] in Serbia, 31,000 are incurring losses, 26,000 have blocked accounts, and 28,000 dropped out of the VAT-charging system because their turnover has plummeted. If this continues, there is no future for the Serbian economy," Knezevic said. 
"Behind all the numbers is the agony and drama of 60,000 families. It is irritating that no one understands that the state benefits much more from the operations of companies than the owners themselves," Knezevic pointed out. 
Official data indicate that Serbia's black market "devours" a whopping 1 billion euros annually from unpaid VAT, while another 1.5 billion euros does not enter the budget due to other taxes and fees. 
In a move to help the economy, the government passed a regulation that imposes a deadline for payment of state fees within 60 days. The regulation will reprogramme the state's current obligations, which total 100m euros, 40% which are debts to the economy. 
Economy analyst Marica Vukovic thinks the action will not be enough, because the long-term recovery requires radical moves. 
"Serbia needs to, for example, suppress the black market. But, around of 30% of the working-age population operate within the gray economy, and no one is prepared to tackle that issue before the elections. The state will, therefore, have to help the economy in the coming year, but the real recovery is impossible without dramatic cuts," Vukovic told SETimes. 
