26/03/2007
(Reuters, B92 - 24/03/07; AP, AFP - 23/03/07; US Department of State -- 21/03/07 - 23/03/07)
US Undersecretary of State Nicholas Burns will express Washington's strong support for UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari's proposed settlement to the Kosovo status issue during his visit to Brussels this week, according to a State Department statement Friday (March 23rd). 
Kosovo will be one of the main issues the senior US diplomat will discuss with NATO and EU officials during his three-day visit to the Belgian capital, beginning Monday. 
Burns "will communicate strong US support for … Ahtisaari's plan for the future of Kosovo", said State Department spokesman Sean McCormack on Friday. 
Ahtisaari, the former Finnish president, was due to make public the final version of his proposal on Monday, after delivering it to the Security Council. During the coming weeks, the Council is expected to debate it and then issue a new resolution on Kosovo later this year. 
Citing diplomatic sources, the AFP reported on Friday that there were no major differences between the document the Council will get and the draft of the blueprint Ahtisaari presented in early February, envisioning an internationally supervised self-rule for Kosovo. 
Ahead of the release of the proposal, the State Department issued a three-part series on Kosovo's future last week, contesting claims by Belgrade and Moscow that the province's potential separation from Serbia would set a precedent for other breakaway regions. Russia fears that an independent Kosovo would encourage separatists in Abkhazia, Chechnya, Nagorno-Karabakh, South Ossetia and Transnistria. 
"There is no situation anywhere in the world that bears a resemblance to Kosovo," the publication quoted US Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Daniel Fried as telling reporters earlier this month. "There is no place where the UN has been administering for seven -- now close to eight -- years. There is no case where NATO was forced to intervene to stop a massive process of ethnic cleansing." 
The Kosovo Albanians, who make up 90% of the province's population of 2 million people, have accepted Ahtisaari's proposal. Serbia has rejected it, saying it cannot cede sovereignty over the province, though it is prepared to offer "broad autonomy". 
Fried stressed that a lasting settlement to the final unresolved territorial dispute following the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s would benefit Kosovo and its surrounding region. "No one dares invest in a country with an unsure status," he said. 
A permanent settlement of the Kosovo issue also will bring about political benefits, facilitate the region's European integration and revive "the prosperity and political clout" the former Yugoslav republics enjoyed before the end of the Cold War, according to the State Department. 
