25/08/2010
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 25/08/10
Turkey could drop Greece and other neighbours from a national "threat list", as Ankara seeks to improve ties with countries regarded through history as enemies. 
Along with Russia, Iraq and Iran, Greece could be removed from a list of nations deemed "threats to national security", as army and government chiefs rework a key defence policy document. A draft was leaked to Turkish media this week, but the plan will be formalised in October. 
The document, known as the "Red Book" or "Secret Constitution", was previously shaped by the security concerns of the army, but is now being rewritten to emphasise economic co-operation, in line with the Justice and Development Party government's pursuit of a zero-problem foreign policy. 
The document is being revised by the government, the National Intelligence Service (MIT) and the General Staff. 
Analysts said the change reflects the desire to improve relations among Turkey and its neighbours, as well as the increasing dominance of the civilian government over areas of policy previously considered solely within the scope of the military. 
"Turkey is going through a big transformation," Bulent Kenes, editor-in-chief of the daily Today's Zaman, told SETimes. 
"Since 2002, the country has been seeking better relationships with its neighbours, but the situation was 100% different ten years ago when we perceived countries such as Iran and Greece as enemies. Today the situation has completely changed so the reassessment of risks is natural." 
Kenes said that in the past, security threats were manipulated by military self-interest. 
"The military and the institutions around it needed these kinds of pretexts to dominate the political scene," he said. "The country's military-civilian relationship has changed, and now Turkey isn't looking at its neighbours from the point of view of security, but from the point of view of trade and co-operation." 
According to the draft, Greece's 19km territorial water belt, in line with international standards, will no longer be regarded by Turkey as a "cause for war", Sabah newspaper reported. 
Relations between the two former foes have been improving over the past decade and trade has blossomed, but both countries continue to keep substantial military presences along their disputed border in the Aegean Sea. 
In Greece, Turkey's perceived threat has continued to fuel its prodigious military spending, which is the highest in proportion to its GDP of any EU country. 
During a May visit to Athens by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan -- in the wake of Greece's economic crisis -- the two nations agreed to hold regular bilateral meetings aimed at mutual defence cuts. 
However others have warned that the proposed changes to the Red Book are so far largely the work of the foreign ministry, and have yet to be subjected to the scrutiny of Turkey's powerful military. 
"I'd love to believe this, but this is just a draft that the foreign ministry is working on," Today's Zaman daily foreign news editor Kerim Balci told SETimes. 
"This document has yet to go to the National Security Council where the army generals are more influential. When it comes to discussing this, the generals will stick to some of their established fears." 
