29/08/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 29/08/05
This year alone, Romania was hit by four major floods, which caused damage totaling more than 2 billion euros. Over 25,000 houses were totally destroyed or seriously damaged, 40 people died and hundreds of roads, railways and bridges were affected. Smaller catastrophes were caused by tornadoes -- a new phenomenon in the region -- as well as landslides triggered by the unusual amount of rain. 
"One of the most important consequences of the climatic changes in Romania is the forming of huge freshets on small water courses," explains Ion Tecuci of the National Hydrology Institute. 
With the government caught off guard by the weather woes, funds for helping people and reconstructing damaged infrastructure have proved hard to find. Besides channelling money from asphalting or construction projects, the authorities are also counting on EU financial assistance."We will be able to access European funds, eventually by redirecting some money from the PHARE, SAPARD or ISPA programmes," says Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu. 
To avoid such delicate financial situations in the future, his administration has decided on a radical measure: introduction of compulsory house insurance against floods, earthquakes, landslides and storms. Premiums will vary for urban and rural areas, based on exposure risks. 
According to a draft likely discussed by parliament this fall, the insured value of a building should be the same as its fiscal value, but should not exceed 15,000 euros. 
"This way, the premium would not exceed 30 euros," Secretary of State Radu Mircea Popescu said during a radio show. As this sum is still high in a country where the average monthly salary is 200 euros and the average pension is 80 euros, the state will subsidise the premium for those with low incomes. 
"Not all the insurance companies will be allowed to practice this kind of insurance. It will be the same as in the case of the third-party compulsory car insurance -- only 13 of the 43 companies are authorised to sell this kind of policy," Nicolae Crisan, the president of the Insurance Supervising Commission, was quoted as saying by the daily Cotidianul. 
In a departure from the regulations on car insurance, however, there won't be fines for those who are unwilling to buy the compulsory house policy. "There will be still some constraints. Those without insurance won't be able, for example, to sell their properties," said Crisan. 
Not everybody is welcoming the idea. For example, some companies don't want to take a chance on the thousands of old jerrybuilt blocks in Bucharest or the approximately two million trellis and adobe houses in the countryside. 
Others criticise the initiative as unethical. "The state gives the insurance companies some contracts which generate profit. Normally, the Competition Council should intervene," the daily Adevarul quotes real estate analyst Artur Silvestri as saying. 
Many ordinary people also believe the draft could be more specific. "I live in Bucharest, on the seventh floor. I guess floods and the landslides are out of question, but I still would have to pay for them," says 35-year-old teacher Dan Tudorescu. 
