25/11/2008
(EurActiv, Blic - 25/11/08; Reuters, Beta, B92, New Kosova Report - 24/11/08)
EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana said on Monday (November 24th) he expects the 27-nation bloc's more than 2,000-strong justice and police mission in Kosovo, known as EULEX, to become fully operational at the beginning of next month. The EU agreed to launch its largest civilian mission ever a day before Kosovo's declaration of independence on February 17th. The initial plan called for a full deployment of EULEX by June 15th, but strong Serbian opposition to the mission scuttled that timetable. 
A compromise emerged earlier this month after Western nations agreed to Belgrade's demands that the mission will not become fully operational before it gets the UN Security Council's approval and that it will be "status neutral". 
An amended six-point plan drafted by UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the deployment of EULEX in the context of UNMIK's reconfiguration, accepted by Serbia, reportedly envisions the UN retaining control of police in the Serb-run areas in the north of Kosovo. Ethnic Albanian police will work with EULEX. 
UN spokesman Brendan Varma confirmed on Monday that Ban has sent his report on Kosovo to the members of the Security Council but could not say when the 15-nation body would discuss it. 
Speaking at a joint press conference with NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, Solana voiced hope that the council will come up with a decision soon and that the deployment of EULEX will begin next week. 
"I strongly hope that a statement about this from the presidency of the UN Security Council will follow," Belgrade-based B92 quoted him as saying. "We also hope ... that the implementation of EULEX will begin on time, in early December, maybe as soon as December 2nd, and that it will be deployed through Kosovo's territory." 
Kosovo's leaders, however, strenuously oppose Ban's plan for UNMIK's reconfiguration, insisting it violates the country's constitution and paves the way for its de facto partition. 
Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni travelled to New York at the weekend to present Pristina's objections. 
According to a Reuters report Monday, the document Ban submitted to the Security Council said that despite its opposition to his six-point plan, the Kosovo government had indicated it was "willing to co-operate with EULEX". 
Kosovo Minister of Transportation and Telecommunication Fatmir Limaj warned last week, however, that the "current institutions' existence would not have meaning if the six-point plan is implemented". 
An article carried by the New Kosova Report on Monday listed a series of other potential negative consequences, including a surge of anti-EU sentiment among the public, a slowdown of the reform process and a potential deterioration of interethnic relations in the country. 
