11/01/2008
(AP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, UPI, Balkan Insight, Office of the High Representative - 10/01/08)
The top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) ordered on Thursday (January 10th) the immediate seizure of travel documents and identity cards from four members of fugitive Bosnian Serb war crimes suspect Radovan Karadzic's family. 
 High Representative Miroslav Lajcak issued the order "at the request of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and in close co-operation with relevant local law enforcement agencies", the Slovak diplomat's office said in a statement. 
The measure applies to the wartime Bosnian Serb leader's wife, Ljiljana Zelen-Karadzic, son Aleksandar, daughter Sonja Karadzic-Jovicevic and her husband, Branislav Jovicevic. 
 "These four persons are in one way or another the subject of orders by the Court of BiH, a decision by the BiH Council of Ministers, international financial and travel sanctions, and ongoing criminal investigations for their role in the support network of Radovan Karadzic," Lajcak said. "Today's actions build upon these measures." 
On Thursday, the four handed in their passports and IDs at a police station in the wartime Bosnian Serb stronghold of Pale, 16km east of Sarajevo, and were told they are not allowed to leave the country. 
 Lajcak also instructed the BiH border police to take any measures necessary if they attempt to leave. The high representative, who has overarching powers in BiH, further stressed that his order was self-executing and not subject to judicial review by any court in the country, its entities, or elsewhere. 
Republika Srpska Interior Ministry spokeswoman Tamara Despenic was quoted by Reuters as saying that BiH's and neighbouring countries' security agencies had already been notified about the measure. 
Karadzic has been on the run for more than 12 years. He disappeared several months after the ICTY issued its initial joint indictment against him and former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic in July 1995. Both have been charged with genocide in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys and the 43-month siege of Sarajevo. 
Karadzic's relatives have consistently denied having any contact with him. In her second public appeal to her husband to surrender, Ljiljana Zelen-Karadzic claimed in October that she had no idea where her husband was "or whether he's alive". 
Seeking to capture the ICTY's most wanted indictee, NATO and EUFOR troops have conducted numerous raids on the Karadzic family home in Pale and those of their children. Documents seized during the searches did not support the family's claims, international officials have said. 
"The international community has made it clear that it expects the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to co-operate fully with the ICTY, playing a proactive role in apprehending all remaining indictees and dismantling their support networks," Lajcak said on Thursday. 
In a separate development, the BiH central government adopted a decision Thursday freezing for 12 months the financial assets of Karadzic and Mladic, as well as those of two other fugitives, former Bosnian Serb police commander Stojan Zupljanin and wartime Croatian Serb leader Goran Hadzic. 
