03/02/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 03/02/09
Kosovo lies on the heroin-smuggling route from Afghanistan to Western Europe, and some of the recreational drugs in transit via Kosovo enter the local market. Experts say drug abuse is on the rise in Kosovo, more so than drug trafficking. 
Flamur, 38, had been abusing recreational drugs for 17 years when he decided to quit four years ago. He says pressure from family and society forced him to quit. "I was completely isolated," he says. Now, in a small drug rehabilitation centre in the Pristina suburbs, he helps others trying to shake their addiction. 
The centre, established by a former prison inmate and his two friends, is named Labyrinth. Safet Blakaj, the former inmate, is its director. 
Labyrinth offers psychiatric counseling, pharmacotherapeutic services and substitution treatment with pharmaceuticals as well as psychotherapy on an individual, family and group basis. About 570 drug addicts aged 13 to 50 receive treatment there. 
Labyrinth is a small private centre funded by the US Embassy, UNICEF and the Swiss-based Partnerships in Health Foundation. However, it is not a clinic. There are no state institutions or specialised clinics in Kosovo offering drug rehab. 
Psychiatrist and Labyrinth cofounder Bujar Berisha says Pristina authorities made prevention of addiction a priority. The centre has taken the initiative to develop a preventive strategy that envisions implementation through 2013. So far, the project has unfolded successfully. Among its various achievements, it has provided intravenous-drug users with confidential, anonymous and free-of-charge counselling and testing in the last ten months. 
Berisha points out that drug abuse in Kosovo is more widespread among the youth, those 22 to 24 years of age, especially in the urban areas of Pristina, Peja, Gjilani and Mitrovica. 
"We intend to include as many drug addicts as possible in our programmes in order to reduce the individual and social risks of drug abuse, which, in turn, would reduce criminal activity and delinquency," says Berisha. 
Meanwhile, Blakaj, who also co-ordinates the psychologists in Kosovo's prisons, says 7% of the inmates are already drug dependent upon entering jail. He says society should help support recovering drug addicts reintegrate into normal life. 
Blakaj urges society as a whole to realise that addiction is not just a personal problem, as it burdens the addict's family, wider community and society in general. 
