12/02/2008
By Nedjeljko Rudovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica –12/02/08
Milo Djukanovic, the charismatic Montenegrin leader who spearheaded the country's drive for independence, is about take the reins again. With Prime Minister Zeljko Sturanovic stepping down due to health problems, Djukanovic has been tapped to succeed him. 
 He reportedly wants to return in order to speed up energy sector development through attracting foreign investment, and to launch construction of a north-south highway. Some also say his comeback is needed to prevent disputes within his Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS). 
The DPS, which has held power in Montenegro for 17 years, includes a number of powerful figures who will not let each other prevail. The party reportedly wants to avoid internal fighting by giving the prime minister's office -- Montenegro's most significant political post -- to the man many see as an uncontested authority. 
 Even Djukanovic has run into obstacles, however. In October 2006, when he decided to step down as prime minister to concentrate on running a business, he wanted to promote Igor Luksic, the young minister of finance, to the job. But his choice was opposed by the influential party vice presidents, Svetozar Marovic and Filip Vujanovic, and Sturanovic was eventually chosen instead. 
Djukanovic's first task when he resumes office will be to draft a set of government priorities to cover the period until autumn 2009, when parliamentary elections are scheduled. He has already signaled that drumming up funds for the energy sector will be one of his key areas of attention. 
"We have a big problem with energy shortfalls which have caused a trade deficit. That could limit our development," he said, warning that a regional water pipeline project risks failure due to insufficient energy supplies. 
Political analyst Svetozar Jovicevic says the wish to privatise large energy facilities is the driving force behind Djukanovic's comeback. Energy privatisation was not a main theme of his predecessor's administration, which was influenced by its coalition partner, the Social Democratic Party (SDP). 
According to Jovicevic, the return of Djukanovic is something of an anomaly. "It is not natural for someone who was for too long the top official of state institutions in very hard times" to again take up the prime minister's post. 
 "It is not normal in democracy to have one man as a prime minister five times," Jovicevic says, warning also that the re-appointment could send a troubling signal abroad because Djukanovic is under investigation in Italy for cigarette smuggling. 
 But Srdjan Darmanovic, dean of the political science department at the University of Montenegro, says it makes sense for Djukanovic to be prime minister again because he is head of the ruling party. 
"That is the case in all parliamentary democracies -- the ruling party chief must be a prime minister," he says. 
