27/12/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 27/12/07
Serbia's parliament adopted a resolution Wednesday (December 26th) that declares Kosovo to be forever part of Serbia's territory, regardless of any decision taken by the leadership in Pristina. The document also cites EU integration as a priority, but only if Serbia can join the bloc as an integral state -- that is, with Kosovo as part of it. 
In addition to the ruling parties, the resolution won backing from the opposition far-right Serbian Radical Party and the Socialist Party of Serbia. The Liberal Democrats, led by Cedomir Jovanovic, voted against the document, saying it would jeopardise Serbia's EU prospects. 
Addressing lawmakers, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica accused the United States of wanting to take Kosovo away from Serbia for the sake of its military and strategic interests. 
"Serbia will not give up the search for an agreement, and will certainly not give Kosovo up. Because we, as a people and as a state, are not free if Kosovo is not a province within Serbia, as written in the constitution," the prime minister said. 
President Boris Tadic told MPs that the government would do everything to keep Kosovo within Serbia, and to keep Serbia on its European path. He vowed that Serbia would never accept Kosovo's independence. 
He also said that if violence erupts in Kosovo and KFOR proves unable to protect the local Serbs, the Serbian Army stands ready -- with the approval of the authorised international institutions -- to "aid and protect the endangered population". 
Serbian Minister for Kosovo Slobodan Samardzic told parliament that the United States and certain EU member states had undermined the status talks by promising the Kosovo Albanians independence, thus giving them little incentive to negotiate. 
Still, he insisted, the most recent round of talks -- supervised by an EU-Russia-US troika -- had been far more successful than the earlier process headed by former UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari. 
The resolution adopted on Wednesday calls for the state to place a top priority on preserving Serbia's sovereignty over Kosovo, until a compromise solution based on UN Security Council Resolution 1244 is adopted. 
Diplomatic and other relations with countries that recognise an independent Kosovo will come under review. When it comes to membership in any military alliance, Serbia would be neutral unless the public decides otherwise in a referendum. 
In reaction to the parliamentary resolution, UNMIK spokesman Aleksandar Ivanko said the document would have no effect on Kosovo, as it is under UN administration. 
The resolution does, however, have a significant political effect within Serbia. Its adoption prevented a potential crisis in relations between the two ruling parties -- Tadic's Democratic Party and Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia. 
