07/12/2006
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 07/12/06
The European Commission's (EC) latest progress report on Croatia, released last month, praised the country's implementation of reforms. While the EU remains split on a precise date for entry, Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader says the report provides hope that the process can be completed by 2009. 
On Tuesday (December 5th), following a meeting with Croatian President Stipe Mesic, European Parliament President Josep Borrell also said 2009 should be seen as the target year for accession. 
Since March 2002, the EC has reported regularly on progress made by the Western Balkan countries. The recent report on Croatia follows the same structure as in previous years. However, this was the first report to cover the period after Croatia formally opened negotiations with the Union. 
Judicial reform is an area of particular concern. While the report acknowledges that the process is under way, it warns that the pace has been slow and that obstacles remain. Case backlog is a major hindrance, and more needs to be done to reduce the length of court proceedings and improve case management, the EC said. 
Croatia is still far from having an independent, impartial, transparent and efficient judicial system, according to the report. Establishing such a system is considered an important indicator of Croatia's readiness for eventual membership and is a prerequisite for the acquis communitaire.
The anticorruption programme that was adopted in March also faces hurdles. "Corruption remains a serious problem. Many allegations of corruption remain uninvestigated and corrupt practices usually go unpunished. Full implementation of the programme and strong political will to step up efforts are needed, especially for high-level corruption," the report said. 
A number of action plans have been prepared and the justice minister was tapped as the programme's co-ordinator. Senior politicians are increasingly highlighting the importance of tackling corruption. 
Both problems -- judiciary reform and fighting corruption -- remain the highest priorities of the government in Zagreb, Sanader said after the report was published. He said these reforms must be implemented not only for EU accession, but for the sake of the country. 
