22/08/2012
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Ohrid -- 22/08/12
The Ohrid Framework Agreement, created in 2001, ended months of armed conflicts in Macedonia between the country's security forces and ethnic Albanian rebels. 
The agreement, signed by the government of Macedonia and ethnic Albanian representatives on August 13th 2001, set the groundwork for improving the rights of the country's Albanian population. 
Azis Polozani, one of the creators of the document, said that the agreement moved Macedonia in a positive direction, but it needs to be reviewed due to the passage of time. 
Albanians are dissatisfied because they claim the agreement does not go far enough, while Macedonians and other minorities say it favors the Albanians at the expense of everybody else. 
"Reviewing the situation [after] these years is crucial. [We need to] round up all the policies to overcome mistrust and cohesion of communities, [and] get into a process where society will be without effects of discrimination," Polozani told SETimes. 
The agreement has no potential to destroy the country nor to strengthen its internal cohesion, Stevo Pendaroski, national security adviser for former President Boris Trajkovski, told SETimes.
"The existence of conflicting views between the two largest ethnic communities is inevitable [due to] the brief historical distance and the need for … both parties to build their ratings. It is true that stereotypes will never be obsolete entirely," Pendarovski said. 
President Gjorge Ivanov criticised Defense Minister Fatmir Besimi, an ethnic Albanian, for attending a ceremony last week at a monument to the Albanians' National Liberation Army fighters killed in the 2001 conflict. The ceremony was to mark the 11th anniversary of the Ohrid document. It was Macedonia’s first institutional expression toward the fighters. 
"The president urges all institutions to refrain from misusing the army for political or party objectives," Ivanov said, adding that "institutional regulations and procedures were not followed" in this case. Besimi said that he regretted that his presence was not "perceived as one of reconciliation in the spirit of the Ohrid Framework Agreement." 
"The Ohrid agreement makes the state an unstable, dysfunctional system. Most want it scrapped altogether, not revived," Milenko Nedelkovski, anchor of "The Milenko Nedelkovski Show," told SETimes. 
But Musa Xhaferi, vice president in charge of implementing the Ohrid Framework Agreement, said that it is actually an agreement for the future of Macedonia. 
"This peace agreement was, and remains, our most important investment for peace and stability in the country that build the foundations of a new society and a better future for all," Xhaferi said. 
Many question, however, whether it was a fight for territory or for rights of Albanians in Macedonia. 
After the 2001 adoption of the agreement, the Albanian community requested that a law be adopted on the closure of the four Hague cases, giving those charged amnesty. The Law on Amnesty was adopted by parliament on March 7th 2002. 
The Hague tribunal kept the four cases for six years without acting on them. It decided not to process them in 2006 and returned them, asking Macedonia to do it instead. 
In 2011, citing the law, lawmakers voted not to prosecute the four war crimes cases involving the National Liberation Army. 
Government officials said the move was an attempt at national reconciliation between Macedonians and Albanians. 
"It closes the big wounds which have previously prevented Macedonia from entering a course of political understanding. It will contribute to ... political and economic stability in the country," DUI parliamentarian Arben Ljanbunista said. 
But many Macedonians continue to be incensed. 
"The Framework Agreement was imposed on Macedonia by force. It changed Macedonia's constitutional order but did not offer closure to the families of the missing or killed Macedonians. Since, it has all been about quotas and other entitlements for Albanians while the rest are suffering," Naum Milenkoski, a 52-year-old Ohrid resident, told SETimes. 
"The agreement gave … its exam. The procrastination of the full completion of the so-called Hague cases has delayed the process of creating the mutual trust that is not healthy for society," says Polozani. 
But, the agreement was the best response to the then state leadership to deal with political and security problems faced by the country, Pendarovski said. 
