16/02/2012
By Bedrana Kaletović for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 16/02/12 
With Croatia's entry into the EU expected in July 2013, wholesale changes will be taking effect, with direct implications for neighbours, especially Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), with which Croatia shares almost two-thirds of its borders. 
Accession will mean concrete changes in the way business, trade, employment, education degree recognition, and a host of other administrative activities are conducted. 
"Symbolically, it will be the EU bordering BiH, bringing a range of practical consequences. Some ... will mean additional trouble, but it could prove motivating. It is realistic to expect an improvement in the relations of BiH and Croatia as well, because good regional politics is one of the basic principals of EU," political analyst Ibrahim Prohic, a professor at University of Tuzla, told SETimes. 
The Euro Info Centre in Tuzla agrees that EU membership will inevitably result in a new era of bilateral relations. The common border, after all, will become an EU border. 
"It is clear that security surveillance will be lifted, but new relations will more strictly follow the trade of goods and services," Centre head Dragana Saric told SETimes. 
The common border also becomes a Schengen border. 
"Citizens of BiH will still be able to travel to Croatia, but it is up to Croatia to decide whether it will be, as it has been, with ID cards only, as it is regulated through a bilateral agreement, or whether the entry of BiH citizens will be conditioned with a valid passport," Zora Stanic, spokeswoman for the EU delegation to BiH, told SETimes. 
Ease of access, especially for tourists from BiH who have spent summer holidays in Croatia, will not be affected, vows Tourism Minister Veljko Ostojic. He tells SETimes that tourists from BiH are showing more interest in spending holidays in Croatia every year. The Croatian Bureau of Statistics says BiH tourists are the 13th most numerous in terms of accommodation usage, a trend that is expected to continue after EU entry. Ostojic stresses however that there is more involved than just rolling out the welcome mat to all. 
"Because of the looser mobility of people, a rise in foreign tourist arrivals of guests from the EU is expected, and for this easement to be useful to neighbouring tourists and Croatian tourism, it is necessary to show a political readiness as well." 
The latest in a series of trilateral meetings among the presidents of Croatia, Serbia and members of BiH presidency was held at the beginning of February. 
"We, as presidents, will the governments to start immediately with resolution of international problems which have long been unresolved," said BiH presidency member Zeljko Komsic. 
While politicians make administrative decisions, financial realities dictate holiday options for BiH citizens. And in some cases, proximity isn't the priority. 
"Turkey will once again be my choice. A three-member family can stay there for less money and have a better quality holiday, and this is the most important for me," Sarajevo resident Mensur Basic tells SETimes. 
