27/12/2005
(AP, AFP, Reuters, International Herald Tribune, RFE/RL - 26/12/05)
A group of Turkish intellectuals issued a declaration Monday (26 December), urging the government to rescind laws that limit freedom of expression. The laws have enabled prosecutors to indict a number of eminent figures in Turkey, including the country's most famous novelist, Orhan Pamuk. 
The statement, signed by 169 prominent academics, artists, journalists and writers, including novelist Yasar Kemal and pianist Fazil Say, described the trial against Pamuk as "a grave interference in our country's democratisation process". 
On 31 August, the award-winning author of "My Name Is Red" and "Snow," who is also viewed as a possible candidate for the Nobel Prize for literature, was charged with "denigrating Turkish national identity" over remarks he made to a Swiss paper earlier this year about the mass killings of Armenians and Kurds. Under article 301 of Turkey's new Penal Code, adopted in June, Pamuk faces a prison sentence of between six months and three years if convicted. 
As the writer went on trial earlier this month, the court adjourned the proceedings to 7 February. According to Reuters, Pamuk may also be facing another court case for allegedly insulting the Turkish military in an interview with the German newspaper Die Welt. 
Article 301, which replaced article 159 of Turkey's old penal code, makes it a crime to insult "Turkishness", the republic, the parliament, the government, the judicial institutions, the military or security structures. 
Monday's declaration also urged authorities to scrap another Penal Code provision envisioning imprisonment of up to 15 years for the dissemination of propaganda via the media against "fundamental national interests" in return for material benefits from foreigners. 
A nationalist group known as the Lawyers Unity Association is reportedly behind some of the lawsuits, including one brought against a leading Turkish-Armenian journalist for "denigrating Turkish identity" in remarks he made about a six-month suspended sentence. 
"I am surprised by the charges because I am a defendant who has been convicted and what is more natural for a convicted defendant than to appeal and try to influence the court that tries him?" Hrant Dink, editor of the bilingual Turkish-Armenian weekly Agos said in remarks quoted by AFP 
