10/03/2009
 (International Crisis Group - 09/03/09)
The international community must not rush to close down the Office of the High Representative (OHR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) as current conditions do not warrant doing so, the International Crisis Group (ICG) said Monday (March 9th). 
With ethnic tensions running high and the situation in BiH deteriorating, a move in that direction "would put at risk the country's relative stability and the progress achieved so far", the prominent Brussels-based advocacy group warned in a report. 
The ICG released the paper ahead of a key two-day meeting of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC), the body of 55 countries and international organisations overseeing the execution of the 1995 Dayton Peace Accords. The meeting begins in Sarajevo on March 25th. 
The PIC should not decide to end the mandate of the high representative and his or her office by June 30th, "as has been foreshadowed", the ICG said. "Rather, it should ... resolve to maintain the office" until BiH fulfils all requirements for a transition from the OHR to an EU Special Representative (EUSR). 
The new high representative should retain executive (Bonn) powers but should be able to use them in only a few situations, such as preventing serious threats to and violations of the Dayton accords. 
 BiH still has yet to fully comply with the Dayton accords, resolve the status of the Brcko District and deal with the state property problem, the ICG stressed. 
Therefore, a decision to close down the OHR "would risk crippling the EU's ability to apply firm policies toward Bosnia " and would weaken its regional credibility, the study warned. 
"Once the OHR closes, hopefully by the end of 2009, a strong EU mission will be needed both to protect Bosnia'’s stability and to encourage its membership candidacy," the ICG said. 
Furthermore, the EU will need to address the still-deep fissures dividing the country's three main ethnic groups. 
"The EU should resolve to act as guarantors of Dayton against unilateral challenge and begin now to focus on the specific powers its Special Representative requires, as well as increase financial support," the report noted. 
The EU mission, which will replace the OHR, should operate under a senior official acting both as the EUSR and as head of the European Commission delegation in BiH. 
In addition, said the report, the EU should negotiate an agreement with BiH that would guarantee the Dayton accords, in which the EU would reject any entity's "withdrawal from the state" or various acts undercutting BiH entities. 
The ICG also recommended that the EUSR report regularly to the UN Security Council and other interested parties. It recommended US co-operation with the EUSR and a boost in NATO's presence in BiH. 
