20/12/2011
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 20/12/11
The ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), which suffered a definitive defeat in the early December parliamentary elections, is starting to come undone. Corruption charges are surfacing, while an interparty struggle is under way. Experts say a complete HDZ dissolution is possible, while party officials claim the crisis will make them stronger. 
Transparency International (TI) Croatia President Nikola Kristic said that HDZ corruption erupted at all levels of government. That the party takes political credit for starting the fight against corruption, said Krstic, is a fable. 
"It is certain that a massive amount of money was drawn from public companies. If all this is proven, the money must be refunded to taxpayers. If there is money shortage [for repayment], the funds will be drawn from the sale of party property," Kristic told SETimes. 
TI Croatia uncovered irregularities in HDZ financial statements in the December election campaign, but the party leaders sharply denied it. 
In the case of Fimi Media, State Prosecutor's Office (USKOK) issued indictments against 11 people, including HDZ as a legal entity. 
All are accused of illegally drawing money from state institutions and enterprises, and filling the HDZ's so-called black fund with a total of 6m euros. 
The first results of investigation show that Ivan Mravak, the former director of the Croatian electric company, admitted that in 2007 under former HDZ treasurer Mladen Barisic's orders he gave 100,000 euros to the HDZ black fund in exchange for a year and a half prison sentence. 
Zdravko Petak, a professor at the Zagreb Faculty of Political Sciences, says a party break up is possible if the struggle becomes open. 
"The scenario in which HDZ is changing into a different party to me is more interesting. I think the party could be transformed into another party or two smaller ones. The party could change the statute and political program in the future, or regroup within a coalition," Petak told SETimes. 
He said that HDZ ruled for more than 15 years, with the exception of three year SDP in power. After that, former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader appeared, and pulled the party forward. 
"Such success is difficult to reproduce. Current events with HDZ are a kind of purging before joining the EU. During negotiations, the EU officials probably never directly stated that someone must be arrested, but there are some unwritten signs indicating this 'off the record'," Petak added. 
The struggle for power within the party is under way. Party official Vladimir Seks said that no one will be nominated against Jadranka Kosor in the upcoming party elections, many voiced their opposition. 
"Seks will not tell me what to do," deputy Vice-President Darko Milinovic said. 
"This is a statement from the socialist era, when one person was deciding everything," party official Andrija Hebrang said. 
Chief HDZ founder Djuro Perica told the Croatian media that HDZ elections -- which will be held in February -- will have several presidential candidates. 
HDZ Vice-President Ivan Jarnjak seems calm regarding inner party struggle and election results. 
"It is good for the country to vent power a bit, and bring changes. However, whether in power or in opposition, HDZ will always be the strongest Croatian party," Jarnjak told SETimes. 
