13/05/2011
By Muharrem Nitaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 13/05/11
Marking the first visit of a Serbian official to Kosovo since 2008, Borko Stefanovic, chief negotiator of Belgrade's delegation in the talks between Kosovo and Serbia, arrived in Pristina on Thursday (May 12th) under heavy security. 
Opposition Vetevendosja supporters reacted to the visit by blocking government buildings, throwing stones at buildings and at Stefanovic's escort. 
"We don't want Stefanovic to spread the propaganda of his country in Kosovo," Vetevendosja Deputy Chairman Glauk Konjufca said. 
Before arriving, however, Stefanovic underlined that the visit would not be related to statehood or constitute recognition of Kosovo's independence. As he put it, the visit did not have a state character. 
"Kosovo cannot fulfill its independence without the key in Belgrade, it cannot become part of international organisations without us, and without the agreement of Belgrade there will be no stable way towards Europe," Stefanovic said. 
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said the visit marked a new phase in relations between Kosovo and Serbia. According to him, the visit signifies the "de jure" beginning of the recognition of the Republic of Kosovo. 
Secretary in the Serb Ministry for Kosovo Oliver Ivanovic told SETimes that the visit marks the correct and visionary step of a man who is not from Kosovo, but who understands the problems very well. 
"Face-to-face talks with Pristina representatives will make it possible for him [Stefanovic] to better understand the concerns of Pristina, but also the dilemmas. Solutions cannot be made with unilateral steps, but with negotiations and joint proposals," Ivanovic told SETimes. 
Astrit Gashi, analyst and editor of the Kosovo daily Zeri, told SETimes that the reactions and protests have clearly shown that Kosovo public opinion is not in favour of talks. 
"Kosovo has decided to enter into talks without preparing public opinion, even without being prepared itself. The main concern of the Kosovo people is what Kosovo aims at through this dialogue, how and if it will structurally separate the north from Kosovo, knowing at the same time that Serbia can facilitate the European integration processes," he said. 
Despite the opposition, Stefanovic met with US Ambassador to Pristina Christopher Dell, and representatives of the Kosovo government, including Deputy Prime Minister Hajredin Kuqi. 
