22/07/2004
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 22/07/04
As part of sweeping reforms aimed at harmonising Turkish laws and regulations with EU criteria, Turkey is expected to soon name a civilian as secretary general of the National Security Council (MGK), further curbing the political power of the country's secularist military. The move, likely after the Military Supreme Council meets between 1 August and 4 August, is being heralded as a major development in Turkey's bid to join the EU, which has demanded an end to the military's involvement in politics.
Umit Pamir, currently Turkey's Permanent Representative to the UN, is reportedly a likely candidate for the post, which is currently held by a general. According to sources, a consensus on his appointment has been reached by President Ahmet Necdet Sezer, the Turkish General Staff and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Pamir worked closely with Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul during the Buergenstock talks on the reunification of Cyprus.
In an interview with the daily Hurriyet, Defence Minister Vecdi Gonul confirmed that the MGK, founded in 1980 after a military coup, would be headed by civilian for the first time in its history. "The appointment will be a crucial development in terms of Turkey's relationship with the EU, at a time when Turkey's EU progress report is being prepared," he said. EU leaders will decide in December whether to give Turkey a firm date to begin entry talks.
Turkey has already acted to transform the MGK from a policymaking body to an advisory one. However, Erdogan and military chief General Hilmi Ozkok agreed last August that the current MGK secretary general, General Sukru Sariisik, would serve for one year as an interim measure.
Gonul emphasised that the relationship between the military and politicians is important to the EU. He cited government efforts to harmonise with EU standards, including passage of laws limiting the MGK's role and the removal of military members from the now-abolished State Security Courts, the Higher Education Board and the Supreme Board of Radio and Television.
"The only place where we have not implemented these laws thus far is the MGK. I believe implementation will occur sometime later this year," Gonul said.
Erdogan, meanwhile, confirmed plans to appoint a civilian to the MGK's top job. "We are now performing our tasks," he said, adding that the move would "fufil the promise of modernisation given to the EU".
