10/01/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 10/01/12
On Friday (January 6th), many Orthodox Serbs prepared for Christmas by lighting the Badnjak, with wishes for good health, happiness and wealth. 
This tradition is more often observed in rural regions today, while those in towns and cities attend the burning of Badnjak outside of churches. 
Serbian Orthodox Church Patriarch Irinej attended the Badnjak ceremony outside the Temple of St Sava in Belgrade. "May the warmth and light of the Badnjak fire warm your hearts and souls, bring you good health, happiness and well being," he said. 
In his Christmas message, Irinej stressed that spiritual peace has been severely dimmed by fear and concern over events in the world, especially in Kosovo and Metohija. 
"To our dear believers, the Serbs in Kosovo and Metohija, we recommend that they persevere in their unjust suffering and to stay in their homes, with their church and their shrines on the land of their grandfathers and great-grandfathers," the patriarch said. 
Economist Miomir Dragic, 42, believes it is now more necessary than ever to abide by religion and tradition. "At the time of economic crisis, when living is hard and when injustices are happening worldwide, Christmas should have a special place," Miomir told SETimes. 
A table brimming with food on Christmas Eve and Christmas Day is a ritual that has not been abandoned, even in times of crisis. "There is less money, but there is the same big amount of food as last year, that doesn't change," says housewife Stanka Kovacevic, 63. 
Several hundred people took part in the traditional breaking of Christmas bread in Belgrade on Saturday. The event, in its 21st year, is organised by the Union of Bakers of Serbia. 
The crowd gathered in front of the Terazije Fountain to get a piece of the bread, which weighed in at 50 kilos and contained three coins. 
One of the coins was found by journalist Valentina Jasovic, who came to cover the event for Jagodina-based Palma Plus TV. 
"Anyone who finds the coin expects this year to be happy and prosperous," she told SETimes. 
