15/09/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 15/09/05
For the first time since independence 14 years ago, the Macedonian head of state has awarded Orders of the Republic of Macedonia. At a ceremony marking Independence Day on 8 September, President Branko Crvenkovski bestowed the highest national honours to former President Kiro Gligorov and -- posthumously -- to the second president of the republic, Boris Trajkovski. 
"Macedonia was fortunate to have the right people at the right place at decisive moments on its road to independence," Crvenkovski said. "The recipients of the awards are people -- leaders, presidents -- to whom the nation now expresses gratitude." 
"Macedonia has ensured its survival," Crvenkovski said. "Now its future should be ensured through fulfilling the strategic goals for NATO and EU integration." 
Expressing gratitude for the honour he received, Gligorov described it as "an incentive and inspiration for all of us together to strive even harder for the development and prosperity of our Macedonia because it is everything we have." 
Trajkovski's widow, Vilma Trajkovska, accepted the award on behalf of her husband, who was killed in a plane crash on 26 February 2004. "Today, on this day, I would be proud and happy if my husband were here to receive the award himself and wear it on his chest," she said. "He invested all his being to the welfare of the homeland." 
Macedonia's independence day was celebrated not only at home but also abroad -- including in the Russian Federation, where a series of commemorative events were held as part of the Days of Macedonian Culture in Russia. A gala concert was performed in Moscow, and renowned director Bajrus Mjaku's theatre troupe performed the play "Father" at the Meyerhold Centre in Saint Petersburg. 
Macedonian athlete Emil Ilic, meanwhile, decided to mark the national holiday in an unusual manner. Two months previously, he set off on foot from Skopje, announcing that he would arrive at the EU headquarters in Brussels in time for Independence Day. On 8 September, after a 63-day walk, he completed his journey, meeting in Brussels with Director of the EC Enlargement Directorate for the Balkans Fabrizio Barbaso. 
"The symbolic value of this undertaking is very important at the moment when the Macedonian people are trying to get closer to the EU," Barbaso said. "I hope that the Macedonian administration will also follow suit and arrive at the finish." Ilic said he had proved in the language of sports that Macedonia is capable of the undertaking. 
Macedonia gained independence on 8 September 1991, when a sweeping majority of voters said yes to the referendum question: "Do you favour an independent and sovereign Macedonia with a possibility to enter a union with other countries or not?" 
