11/11/2008
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 11/11/08 
"Despite its strong political mandate, the [Turkish] government did not put forward a consistent and comprehensive programme of political reforms", the EU said in its 2008 Progress Report. It criticised Turkey for continuing restrictions on freedom of expression, governmental pressure on the media, the military's influence in politics and lack of progress on ensuring cultural diversity and respect for minorities. 
The report also expressed disappointment over the failure of a push for a new constitution to align Turkey with international standards on basic rights. 
Criticising the recent controversial bans on certain websites in Turkey, the EU said the bans were "disproportionate in scope and duration". It also raised the question of government pressure on the news media. 
As an example, it cited Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's call for a boycott of Dogan, the country's biggest media group, following its coverage of a major corruption scandal allegedly linked to the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP). 
Article 301 of the Turkish criminal code, with its vague provisos criminalising "public denigration" of "Turkishness", remains a sore point for the EU. In April, parliament adopted amendments restricting the scope of Article 301, but the EU report emphasised they were inadequate. 
Turkey's attitude towards its citizens of Kurdish origin has been limited and uneven, according to the EU. The Kurdish minority still awaits a promised TV channel broadcasting exclusively in its language. Children with a native tongue other than Turkish cannot learn it in public schools. 
The EU's progress report on Turkey also objected to the military's influence in politics, saying, "Senior members of the armed forces have expressed their opinion on domestic and foreign policy issues going beyond their remit." 
The AKP reacted by insisting there is no question of its commitment to the EU membership process. 
Responding to questions from reporters, Deputy Prime Minister Cemil Cicek said there was no slowdown in efforts to enact EU reforms. He scolded opposition parties for allegedly showing almost no interest in new reforms. 
Cicek also criticised the EU's considerable expectations, saying "Adopting a new law in Turkey is not as easy as taking a cigarette pack from your pocket." 
Turkey started EU accession talks in 2005, but negotiators have opened only eight of the 35 necessary chapters and closed only one so far. The standoff over Cyprus and objections by French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who opposes Turkish membership in the EU, have combined to block the opening of 13 key chapters. Many analysts in Turkey view inaction on these chapters as the main reason for declining public interest in EU accession. 
