12/05/2005
(Office of the High Representative -- 11/05/05 - 12/05/05; Fena - 11/05/05; SEE Security Monitor - 10/05/05)
The Office of the High Representative (OHR) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) warned on Wednesday (11 May) that a Bosnian Serb party's decision to retreat from an initial agreement on police reform could jeopardise the country's EU bid. 
 Eleven BiH parliamentary parties, including the Serb Democratic Party (SDS), reached an agreement on 28 April concerning the core, EU-defined principles of police restructuring. Efforts are currently under way to work out key elements of the reform and clear the way for a final deal. Police restructuring is a key condition for BiH's progress towards EU accession. 
A European Commission team is due to arrive in BiH on 19 May to review progress in meeting the 16 requirements laid down in the EU feasibility study for the country. A positive assessment would allow BiH to start talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Brussels, a major first step towards eventual EU membership. 
But the local press reported Tuesday that the SDS main board has decided to retreat from the agreement reached at Mount Vlasic last month, arguing that provisions allowing police forces to cross the line separating Republika Srpska (RS) and the Federation of BiH were unacceptable. 
 Describing those reports as "disturbing", the OHR said Wednesday that if true, "the consequences would be disastrous for the RS and for BiH as a whole." If the SDS has endorsed such a stance, it would mean that it has decided to destroy the country's chances for moving ahead on the path to Europe, the OHR added. 
 On Tuesday, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said it would be extremely difficult for Brussels to conclude that BiH has made "significant progress" on police reform if there was no full political agreement in line with the principles set out by the EU. 
If the SDS decides to block police reform, and thus BiH's European future, the party and the Bosnian Serb entity will have chosen "the path to isolation and stagnation", Ashdown's office warned. 
"They will condemn their people -- and BiH as a whole -- to being prisoners of their past, when they have the chance to embrace a future in modern Europe and all it can offer in terms of jobs, freedom to travel, security and prosperity," the OHR said. 
The Dutch Embassy in BiH issued a similar statement. Describing the reports about the SDS move as "very worrying", the diplomatic mission said they "bring into serious risk the chances for the negotiations on an SAA with the EU". 
