14/01/2008
(Independent, B92 - 12/01/08; AP, Reuters, BBC, UPI, VOA, Beta, B92, Balkan Insight - 11/01/08)
In a move unprecedented since the overthrow of Slobodan Milosevic's regime, Serbia decided on Friday (January 11th) to ban British and US embassy officials from monitoring the country's upcoming presidential election. 
Requests by the two diplomatic missions were turned down by the Serbian Electoral Commission as the vote fell short of the required majority for approval. 
A total of 12 members -- representing the Democratic Party (DS), G17 Plus, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) and the Hungarian Coalition -- voted to allow British and US monitors. The support of a minimum of 14 commission members was required. 
Although the two embassies' bids had earlier been approved by the government of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, representatives of his Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) were among the seven who voted against the bids. 
The move, announced about a week before the first round of the presidential election on January 20th, followed Kostunica's repeated criticism of Western backing for Kosovo's quest for independence. 
Slavoljub Milenkovic, a commission member from UN war crimes indictee Vojislav Seselj's Serbian Radical Party (SRS), said British and US officials would not be allowed to monitor the vote "because their countries want to destroy us and grab Kosovo away from Serbia". 
The electoral commission first decided to reject the British and US requests late Thursday, prompting a complaint by LDP member Savo Pilipovic. He told reporters "a second illegal ruling has been brought, and there are no grounds for it." 
Public Administration and Local Self-Government Minister Milan Markovic, who is a member of President Boris Tadic's DS, shared a similar view. Noting that Serbia's election procedures are in line "with the highest democratic standards", he viewed the commission's refusal to allow British and US officials to monitor the election as groundless. 
The two embassies were baffled and disappointed by the commission's decision, but were still considering whether to lodge a protest. 
"Monitoring elections should not be turned into a political issue," Belgrade-based B92 quoted the British diplomatic mission in Serbia as saying. 
Another statement, issued by the Foreign Office in London said it has "asked the Serbian Electoral Commission for clarification". 
 On Thursday, the electoral commission decided to allow 23 observers from the OSCE's Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights and three representatives of the Inter-Parliamentary Assembly of the Commonwealth of Independent States to monitor the election. According to a report Friday by Belgrade-based Beta news agency, the cabinet could also grant access to a group of Slovak monitors, whose application arrived late. 
The primary contenders for the presidency are Tadic and Tomislav Nikolic of the SRS. As polls suggest neither of them is likely to garner more than 50% of voter support -- an outright victory in the first round -- a runoff is expected and has tentatively been scheduled for February 3rd. 
