23/12/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 23/12/05
As a quick glance at the makeup of the parliament and government shows, politics in Albania continues to be dominated by men. Although current Parliament Speaker Jozefina Topalli is a woman, all but ten out of the 140 seats in parliament are held by male MPs. 
Prime Minister Sali Berisha's 14-member cabinet, meanwhile, has one female minister. She is Arenca Troshani, a 32-year-old lawyer tasked with the important job of leading the country towards EU integration. 
These realities contrast sharply with the promises of political parties, which have vowed to promote equal opportunity in politics for men and women. 
Eglantina Gjermeni, an expert on gender equality issues and the director of Women's Centre in Tirana, says the country is going through a long transitional phase. She points out that women face disadvantages in many developed societies as well. 
"Politics in Albania is seen as a male profession. This is supported also by the media and the society. It is seen as a profession with a lot of economic benefits for men, who naturally do not want to share it with the women," Gjermeni told Germany's Deutsche Welle radio. 
Another factor, she says, is the role of the women in the family -- one that seldom enables them to concern themselves with politics. 
In comparison to the rest of the Balkans, Albania has the lowest representation of women in government and parliament. On the other hand, the neighbouring province of Kosovo has seen a marked improvement, thanks to laws setting out a 30 per cent requirement for women's participation in politics. 
Albania should also pass such a law, Gjermeni says, adding that only implementation of such legislation by political parties is likely to change the situation in the country. 
A poll by the National Democratic Institute on voting trends among women found that 76.6 per cent of respondents see the involvement of women in politics as a positive development, while 13 per cent oppose it. According to the survey, Topalli is the most popular female politician, followed by former EU Integration Minister Ermelinda Meksi. 
