12/01/2011
(DPA, Cyprus News Agency, Zaman, World Bulletin - 12/01/11; AFP, AP, DPA, Bloomberg, Reuters, Deutsche Welle, Cyprus News Agency, Financial Mirror, Cyprus Mail, Xinhua, Expatica.com - 11/01/11)
German Chancellor Angela Merkel voiced support for the Cyprus peace negotiations during a historic visit to Nicosia on Tuesday (January 11th), saying her country is ready to share its experience of reunification once the talks mature. 
The Mediterranean island has been split along ethnic lines since 1974, when Turkey invaded its northern third following an Athens-backed coup aimed at uniting Cyprus with Greece. In 2004, the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part joined the EU, representing the entire island, and excluding the breakaway Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which Ankara alone recognises. 
The latest UN-mediated reunification talks between leaders of the two ethnic communities were launched in September 2008. More than 28 months later, an agreement remains elusive. 
Speaking at a joint news conference with Cypriot President Dimitris Christofias during her five-hour visit to Nicosia, Merkel praised the Greek Cypriot side's efforts and appeared to criticise Turkish Cypriots for not doing enough to reach an agreement. 
 "We see that you are taking many steps and we also see that the Turkish side is not responding accordingly to these steps," she said following talks with the Cypriot president. "Your steps show that you are prepared to come to a compromise." 
A reunification deal would bring to an end the international isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community, remove a key obstacle to closer EU-NATO co-operation, and give new impetus to Turkey's EU membership negotiations. 
Several months before the launch of its membership talks, Ankara signed a protocol extending its customs agreement with the EU to all its members, including Cyprus, but has so far not followed through. 
 "As long as Turkey is not implementing the Ankara Protocol, no negotiating chapters can be closed or have been closed," Merkel said in Nicosia on Tuesday. 
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan rejected her criticism. 
"I guess Ms Merkel has forgotten what she has said," Turkish media reports on Wednesday quoted him as saying. "She herself said that it was wrong to admit southern Cyprus into the EU. It is also clear that she does not know about the history of the Cyprus issue." 
 Merkel's visit to Nicosia came a day before the resumption of talks between Christofias and Eroglu after a several-week break to allow the Turkish Cypriot leader to recover from heart surgery on December 19th. 
The two are due to meet with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in Geneva on January 26th in an effort to give a new impetus to the peace negotiation process. 
