24/11/2005
By Vlatko Vukotic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka – 24/11/05
The Independent Social Democratic Union (SNSD), the leading opposition party in Republika Srpska (RS), has the most support of any political party in RS, according to a poll by the US-based International Republican Institute (IRI). The survey found the SNSD has 28 per cent support, compared to 10 per cent for the ruling Serb Democratic Party (SDS). 
Political analysts in Banja Luka say these results signal broad dissatisfaction with the SDS. On the one hand, many in RS blame the party for signing on to reforms that weaken the entity authorities and strengthen the central BiH institutions. At the same time, the current government has had little success in addressing social and economic woes in RS. 
Poll results, including a set released Thursday (24 November) by the daily Nezavisne novine, also show the SNSD enjoys the most support of any single political party across BiH. Were general elections held now, the paper said, the SNSD would win 13.3 per cent of the votes at a national level, with the major Bosniak party -- the Party of Democratic Action -- next with 9.3 per cent. The SDS would win a mere 4.4 of the vote, and the Croatian Democratic Union only 3.5 per cent. 
As his party's popularity continues to rise, SNSD leader Milorad Dodik has also unburdened himself of a serious legal entanglement. A court in Banja Luka finally dropped charges of abuse of office, stemming from Dodik's tenure as RS prime minister from 1998 to 2000. He had been accused of draining at least 3m euros from the entity budget. Because of the allegations, international community representatives banned him from running for prime minister at the start of this year. 
Since then, RS President Dragan Cavic has offered Dodik a position as BiH's main negotiator with the EU, but Dodik turned it down. Polls suggest that the main political battle in upcoming elections in RS will be between Dodik and Cavic, the entity's two most popular politicians. Cavic's SDS -- the party founded by former RS President and current Hague indictee Radovan Karadzic -- has been trying to shake off its ultranationalistic image and re-emerge as a party favouring BiH's integration into the EU and NATO. 
Recognising those efforts, High Representative Paddy Ashdown has lifted bans on political activity by 23 people, many of them close associates of Cavic. He also partially unblocked SDS bank accounts, enabling the party to resume normal financing. 
As preparations for the fall campaign in RS get under way, dwindling turnout is a concern. Three years ago only about 50 per cent of eligible voters went to the polls. Analysts say the number will likely drop further during the next round, due to declining trust in political parties. 
