16/09/2005
(Xinhua, Prague Daily Monitor, Sofia Echo - 16/09/05; CTK, BTA, BNN, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Vseki Den - 15/09/05; AFX - 13/09/05; Sofia News Agency - 07/09/05)
The Czech Republic has become the second EU member state, after Slovakia, to approve Bulgaria and Romania's accession treaty with the Union. On Thursday (15 September), the 81-seat Czech Senate almost unanimously supported the EU entry bids. Only two senators abstained, the Czech news agency CTK reported. 
Describing the vote as "historic", Czech Foreign Minister Cyril Svoboda said the accession of the two Balkan nations would contribute to the stability of the entire continent and was in his country's interest. It would also help spur their further political and economic development, he said. 
While noting that the Bulgarian and Romanian economies were still "in the period of fragile and vulnerable developments," Senate Chairman Premysl Sobotka stressed that both countries undoubtedly belong to Europe. 
Under the treaty signed with the EU on 25 April, they are to join the 25-nation club on 1 January 2007. Slovakia ratified the treaty on 21 June, while lawmakers in another new bloc member, Hungary, are expected to do so by the end of September. The Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary joined the EU on 1 May 2004 along with seven other Central and Eastern European countries. Bulgaria and Romania's accession must be endorsed by all 25-member nations. 
In recent weeks and months, however, EU officials have warned both Sofia and Bucharest that they must speed up the implementation of required reforms to avoid the activation of a safeguard clause. It allows for postponing membership by one year if accession commitments are not met. 
During a visit to Sofia this week, EU Commissioner for Taxation and Customs Laszlo Kovacs urged Bulgaria's new government to step up the fight against corruption, counterfeiting and fraud so that the EU entry target date can be met. 
"The commission is satisfied that the new government with the participation of the three major parties has been formed and ... is in a position to push through all the necessary legislation in parliament and complete the preparation for EU accession," Kovacs said at a press conference in Sofia on Tuesday. He is the first European commissioner to visit Bulgaria since the new government took office on 16 August. 
A day later, European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso voiced confidence that Bulgaria would become an EU member, though he declined to specify a date. He also would not say whether a report on Bulgaria's accession progress, due to be issued by the EC within weeks, would recommend that the country join the Union on schedule. 
"The European Commission wants Bulgaria to join the EU, but cannot say precisely when," the Sofia News Agency quoted Barroso as telling President Georgi Parvanov on Wednesday, as they met on the sidelines of the UN summit in New York. "The commission will make a fair assessment of what the country has accomplished and what else it has to cope with before becoming a full member of the EU." 
Speaking to reporters after the meeting, the EC president stressed that implementing reforms is more important than adopting the required legislation. Barroso said he hoped Parvanov understands that the country must speed up reforms in all areas. 
