19/08/2009
By Brian Salmi for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 19/08/09
While more and more Montenegrins rely on the web as part of their daily lives, internet use in the country still remains low compared to the EU. Currently the rate stands at 41%, compared to the EU average of 61%. 
 Hoping to close this gap in the next few years, companies and the government have been rolling out schemes to attract more users and boost the country's internet penetration rate (IPR). 
"We give six months free wireless internet to more than 250 of Montenegro's top high school students every year," said Eleonora Albijanic, corporate communications manager at Promonte, one of three major telecoms operating locally. The company also gives free laptops and internet subscriptions to physically disabled Montenegrins. 
Jelena Radonjic, media liaison at rival provider T-Com, says her company gives "free ADSL connections to every primary and secondary school in Montenegro". 
The government, meanwhile, has launched various programs aimed at making the web more accessible. According to Information Society Ministry spokesperson Radule Novovic, the authorities will "provide 300 Montenegrin seniors with free introductory internet courses" starting in September. 
Student Bojan Cincur has another idea. "They should be opening dozens and dozens of internet cafes across the country," he suggests. Currently, downtown Podgorica has only two internet cafes, with a total of five antiquated machines. In the country's economically troubled north, public access computers and high speed connections are even harder to come by. 
 Cincur recently became one of the first to graduate from the Faculty of Information Technology at Mediterranean University's Podgorica campus, finishing at the top of his class. He says Montenegro's young people are in dire need of web access outside the academic environment. 
"They need to be allowed to go to places on the web that teachers won't let them go to, like Facebook and World of Warcraft. It's kind of like Harry Potter", Cincur explains. "You may not like the books, but millions of kids are reading because of them." 
Computers are an unaffordable luxury for many in Montenegro, but Cincur has an answer for that too. Pulling out his mobile phone, Cincur says, "This is a 150-euro phone. I got it for 15 euros when I signed up for a two-year subscription. Why not do the same with computers? Work a deal with Dell, or some other huge PC manufacturer, and offer package deals that will let people buy their first computers [on instalment plans tied to internet subscriptions]." 
Cincur adds that the government could play a key role by refurbishing rundown buildings -- of which there are many in every community -- and rent them out to one or all of the major telecoms, at below market rates. 
 "It's a good idea," says T-Com's Radonjic. Her firm, which has a lock on landline services in the country, provides service to more than 90% of Montenegro's internet users. Approximately 115,000 Montenegrins are hooked up to the web via T-Com plans. 
Promonte, meanwhile, boasts that more than three-quarters of the country's 640,000 citizens are using its mobile phone services. However, the company had less than 5,000 subscribers to its high-speed mobile internet service at the end of last year. 
