10/08/2006
(The Guardian, Blic, OHR Morning Media Brief - 10/08/06; AP, UPI, BBC, AKI, Euronews, B92, FENA, Makfax - 09/08/06; AFP, Serbian Government - 08/08/06)
Voicing support for a wartime Bosnian Muslim commander and his troops, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) Presidency Chairman Sulejman Tihic denied on Wednesday (9 August) allegations linking them to atrocities committed against ethnic Serbs during a 1995 offensive. 
Tihic's reaction was in response to a Serbian government statement Tuesday, demanding that retired General Atif Dudakovic and "other war criminals who committed crimes against Serbs" be arrested immediately and brought to justice. 
The statement was issued after Radio Television Serbia (RTS) aired a videotape Monday evening showing the wartime commander of the BiH Army's Fifth Corps ordering his soldiers to torch Serb villages in the Bosnian Krajina region in mid-September 1995. The footage also showed houses and other property in flames. 
 "I reject any accusation against Atif Dudakovic and the Fifth Corps of the Bosnian Army, who defended their country against aggression and destruction," Tihic said in a statement. 
The general, who is considered a hero by Bosnian Muslims for his role in the defence of the Bihac pocket in northwestern BiH during a three-year Serb siege, also denied the accusations against him and his soldiers. 
"It is true that I led the operation, but it is not true that war crimes were committed, and even if some had happened, those were individual cases," Dudakovic told the FENA news agency on Tuesday. 
According to the Serbian government, however, the footage "proves beyond doubt" the general's involvement in atrocities and should serve as sufficient grounds for the initiation of an investigation and legal proceedings against him. 
The amateur video aired by RTS was the second of its kind to be broadcast in the course of several days. The first was aired on Friday by Belgrade-based Radio Television B92 and TVBN from Bijeljina in BiH. It showed members of the BiH Army's "Hamze" squad and of the Croatian Army's "Black Mambas" unit harassing and attacking convoys of Serb refugees. 
The events depicted on that tape took place in August 1995, during a Croatian Army offensive, dubbed Operation Storm, aimed at regaining control over the self-declared republic of Serb Krajina. The footage also showed troops killing a Serb who had surrendered. 
Serbian prosecutors have sent copies of the videotape to the BiH and Croatian authorities, prompting investigations in the two countries. Officials in Zagreb have denied the involvement of the Croatian military in the alleged war crimes, or that they were committed on Croatian soil. 
Meanwhile, Bosnian Serb officials in Republika Srpska (RS), including President Dragan Cavic and Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, said they would file criminal charges against Dudakovic and others who committed crimes during Operation Storm. The footage "proves once again that crimes have been committed not only on behalf of Republika Srpska, but also Croatia and Bosnia," Dodik was quoted as saying in a statement. 
BiH media quoted Tihic as noting on Wednesday that such statements coming from Serbian and RS leaders represent direct pressure against the prosecution and were aimed at representing the aggressors and defenders of BiH as equal. Instead, the BiH president said, they should focus on capturing the two highest profile Bosnian Serb war crimes fugitives. 
"If they are really interested in processing war criminals, they can prove that by arresting Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, since they have been hiding them and financing them for the last 11 years," Tihic said. 
