17/05/2007
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times -- 17/05/07
A last-minute coalition deal has ended six months of political limbo in Serbia, clearing the way for a new government. As a result, Serbia's financial markets have regained some of their stability. Financial experts, however, say this year is lost as far as the country's economic growth goals are concerned. 
The dinar dropped sharply after Tomislav Nikolic, a hardline nationalist who wants Serbia to break with the West and join a new bloc led by Russia, became parliament speaker on May 8th. After Nikolic resigned on Sunday (May 13th), the dinar revived, and has now nearly returned to its level at the start of the month. 
Nikolic's six days in office, however, cost the National Bank of Serbia 75m euros. This was the amount the bank spent trying to slow down the currency's decline. 
Another recovery was made in the Belgrade Stock Exchange, where shares of Serbian's major companies jumped 15%, after a record drop of almost 20% in the value indexes on May 7th. 
Experts at the Economics Institute in Belgrade are more worried about the fact that Serbia didn't have a government for six months. After Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's earlier coalition fell apart in November, the government had to operate without a budget. The state treasury collected revenues and paid expenses under so-called temporary financing, which has been extended -- contrary to the law -- beyond the three month mark. 
The new government now will have the challenge of convincing foreign investors that the political instability is over and Serbia is back on the road to joining the EU. The job will not be an easy one, State Agency for Foreign Investments Director Jasna Matic says. She said that since January, investor interest is a fraction of what it was last year. No one wants to invest in a country with an uncertain future. 
"Last May, we used to get at least 20 calls per day from foreign investors inquiring about specific conditions for investing. Today, the number of queries has dropped appreciably. This is worrisome and I fear that this year is lost in terms of investments in Serbia," Matic said. 
Although 620m euros were invested during January and February, this was the result of contracts secured last year, according to Matic's agency. 
Given the political acrobatics in the country, the chance of Serbia reaching close to the amount of foreign investment as the past year is slim. On top of that, Kostunica must now initiate a restrictive state budget, in line with IMF and World Bank recommendations. In March, the Fund said a budget with a surplus of 2.5% of the GDP will "curb demand and put Serbia on a sustainable path". 
