03/06/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 03/06/05
At a joint news conference Thursday (2 June) with visiting UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica announced that several people have been arrested for their alleged role in executing Muslim prisoners at Srebrenica in 1995. The move came after video footage, showing members of the Scorpions paramilitary unit killing six Bosnian Muslims, was shown at the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague. 
The "brutal, callous and disgraceful crime" committed ten years ago will be revealed to the public in detail as soon as authorities obtain enough information, Kostunica said. "I think it is very important for our public that the response was swift," he added. 
Del Ponte praised the Serbian government's prompt reaction, calling it a "brilliant operation". She thanked the government, asking, however, for the same speed in arresting and extraditing those still wanted by the tribunal. 
The video, shown Wednesday by prosecutors at the trial of former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic, sent shockwaves across Serbia, where recent polls suggested that over half the population still does not acknowledge the Srebrenica massacre took place. The footage shows men being unloaded from a truck, marched to a wooded hillside -- said by UN prosecutors to be located at Mt Treskavica, near the wartime Bosnian Serb capital of Pale -- and then shot in the back with machine guns. Two prisoners are executed after first being ordered to carry the bodies of the others to a barn. 
"Serbia is deeply shocked," said President Boris Tadic. "Those images are proof of a monstrous crime committed against persons of a different religion. And the guilty had walked as free men until now." 
Serbia-Montenegro Human and Minority Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic said the government had known about the video footage for ten days, but did not react until Wednesday because of an ongoing pre-trail procedure. "What surprised the [Serbian] prosecution was the tribunal's presentation of the video, which was not planned. That sped up the investigation procedure," he said. 
In a statement, Tadic said he is ready to visit Srebrenica and pay respects to the victims. Only by facing and revealing the facts about crimes and shedding the collective guilt can the country become an EU candidate, he said. 
Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic, meanwhile, said that is a national duty to bring to justice all those who committed crimes. 
"The ones we saw in the video killing unarmed young men of Srebrenica, the organisers and masterminds of similar and other crimes also committed the greatest possible crime against the Serbian and Montenegrin people," Draskovic said. 
The ten-year anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre will be commemorated in mid-July. It remains to be seen whether the prime suspects -- former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and wartime commander Ratko Mladic -- will be brought to justice by then. 
According to analysts, the release of the graphic footage will wake up a Serbian public that had until now been reluctant to face the legacy of the past. Many continue to view war crimes indictees as heroes. These analysts note however, there is nothing heroic about shooting prisoners in the back. 
