13/08/2008
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 13/08/08
UNMIK will begin its biggest staff reduction ever this week, nine years after its deployment to govern Kosovo. "In the next few days, UNMIK staff will be downsized and receive notification that their contracts are terminated," UNMIK spokesman Alexander Ivanko said on Monday (August 11th). 
The process will start with those already at the end of their contracts. "It is not known how many UN personnel will leave Kosovo in the first phase," Ivanko said, but observers expect around 70% of the staff to depart. This will leave about 600 UNMIK personnel in the former Serbian province. 
UNMIK is the interim civilian administration in Kosovo, under the authority of the UN. The mission is divided into four sections or pillars. Pillar I comprises the UN lead police and justice sector; Pillar II, the UN Civil Administration; Pillar III, OSCE-led democratisation and institution building; and Pillar IV, EU-led reconstruction and economic development. 
After Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence on February 17th, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon announced that the UNMIK presence in Kosovo would be reconfigured. Most of UNMIK's duties will shift to local institutions, while the new EU mission, EULEX, will inherit limited judiciary and police powers. 
In the nine years, UNMIK has faced criticism from both Kosovo Albanians and the minority Kosovo Serbs. The main problem is the lack of infrastructure reconstruction, which means electricity distribution is unstable. The slow transfer of responsibilities to Kosovo institutions, corruption allegations and human rights violations brought more criticism to the mission. Detractors also slammed UMMIK for failing to implement an economic development strategy. 
Observers predict the reconfiguration will be complete by December. The EULEX mission is expected to be fully in place and operational by the fall, EU security chief Javier Solana said late last month. 
It will include 2,000 personnel consisting of police officers -- including four anti-riot units -- prosecutors and judges. 
