27/07/2005
(Office of the High Representative, FENA, ONASA - 26/07/05)
The top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and the head of the European Commission (EC) delegation in the country voiced disappointment Tuesday (26 July) over the failure of an attempt to hold police reform talks. 
BiH Prime Minister Adnan Terzic and the international community's High Representative, Paddy Ashdown, had invited the main political parties to a meeting in Sarajevo to determine the next steps towards reaching a framework agreement on police restructuring, a critical requirement for BiH's EU integration progress. However some key parties, particularly the Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) and the Serb Democratic Party (SDS), failed to show up. 
"I am very disappointed by the failure of today's meeting, especially by the lack of responsibility and seriousness shown by those political parties who did not even attend the meeting," the head of the EC delegation in Sarajevo, Ambassador Michael Humphreys, said in a statement Tuesday. For the country to move forward on its path towards Europe, all political leaders must show a commitment to reforms, including police reform, Humphreys said. 
Earlier this year, the SDS scuttled an agreement reached on the core principles of police restructuring in BiH. The party backed out just days before an EC team arrived in Sarajevo to review BiH's progress in meeting the requirements laid down in the EU feasibility study. A positive assessment would have allowed BiH to start talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Brussels, a major first step towards eventual EU membership. Because of the collapse of the police reform negotiations, however, that step was put on hold. 
Ashdown voiced his strong disappointment with the latest setback, charging that the SDS and SNSD were sacrificing the country's EU future for the sake of party politics. "There is no country that has joined the EU in the past few years without forming a cross-party political consensus on issues that are vital to progressing towards EU membership," Ashdown said. 
According to the OHR statement, the parties that attended Tuesday's meeting agreed to support the establishment of a working group to draft a proposal that will form the basis for negotiations on unresolved issues, particularly the EU requirement that regional police areas be based on functionality and not politics. But this group will be able to begin its work only after the parties that failed to attend Tuesday's meeting "explicitly endorse the process by sending a letter to the (BiH) Council of Ministers and the OHR". 
If this happens, a meeting will be held at the beginning of September in order to reach a political agreement that would then be voted on by the parliaments, the OHR statement said. 
Recalling the BiH authorities' wish for the start of SAA talks before the 10th anniversary of the Dayton Peace Agreement, Humphreys said everyone agreed that "this would be an appropriate way" to close the wartime chapter of BiH's history. 
"If this is to be achieved there will need to be very clear progress on police reform by September, otherwise BiH will have to wait even longer before its citizens are able to start reaping the rewards of coming closer to the EU," the EU official stressed. 
