03/01/2007
By John Demopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 03/01/07
Plans to build a mosque in Athens -- approved in 2004 when the current, New Democracy-led government took office -- have met several setbacks. "We've been hearing words, a lot of words for a long time, but we still haven't seen any action," says Mazen Rassas, leader of the Muslim Union of Greece. 
The idea floundered after local communities opposed the building and disagreements ensued over its location. Moreover, the project has been delayed by "the absence of a single voice from the Muslim community, and by the community's failure to place an official request before the ministry," according to New Democracy spokesman George Vassileiou. 
"We didn't pursue it properly," Rassas agrees. "We should have been united, rather than speaking with three, four, five voices." 
Nevertheless, there is cause for optimism. Parliament has given provisional approval to the construction of a state-funded mosque in the centre of Athens. Minister for Education and Religious Affairs Marietta Yannakou is attempting to push through the remaining legislation on management of the project. 
Politically, the plan has encountered little resistance, and the principle of religious freedom has proved a consensus-builder in parliament. Vassileiou told MPs voting on Yannakou's bill that they faced "a historic moment of parliamentary responsibility", and that rejection of the bill would constitute "cultural regression and a victory for xenophobia". 
Left-wing opposition parties followed suit in announcing their approval for the mosque and the underlying principles. 
According to Rassas, who has been in consultation with the government, the mosque's prospects are looking increasingly positive. "We pray five times a day, so it must be close to the centre, but the new location is better. This time I think they'll do it. It might be delayed, but this time it will happen." 
However, the new proposed location -- a former navy base -- remains questionable. The area also has been earmarked for a new football stadium, and some argue that placing the mosque so close to the organised violence of Greek football is unwise. 
Politicians also have criticised the make-up of the proposed seven-member administrative board, which would include only two representatives from Muslim communities. "It runs against the principles of religious freedom and equality for a legal entity, charged with the running of the mosque, to be managed by a majority of Christian, or at least non-Muslim, civil servants," PASOK deputy Evangelos Venizelos said. 
Fears also exist that poor representation on the board will sideline smaller Islamic denominations, fuelling interdenominational antagonism. Nevertheless, Yannakou believes that time is of the essence. "If we want to wait another 20 years to create something for Greece's Muslims, then of course we can analyse all these other factors," the minister said. "The government wants to make things happen as soon as possible." 
Athens has a Muslim population of about 200,000, according to the BBC. The country is 96% Greek Orthodox. 
