14/09/2007
(Zaman, Turkish Daily News - 14/09/07; AFP - 13/09/07; AP, AFP - 10/05/06; Turkish Daily News - 16/02/06)
Overturning the acquittal of two prominent Turkish academics who were tried last year for their calls to boost the rights of minorities, a top court in Ankara ruled on Thursday (September 13th) that both should be convicted of inciting racial hatred. 
In a 2004 government-sponsored report, professors Baskin Oran and Ibrahim Kaboglu criticised the treatment of minorities in Turkey and recommended that non-Muslim groups be given equal rights. Furthermore, they suggested that, alongside Greeks, Armenians and Jews, Turkey's Kurds should be recognised as an ethnic minority. 
The report was rejected by the government and was never published. The few excerpts leaked to the media sparked sharp criticism among nationalist groups, describing the paper as treasonous. Both professors eventually resigned from the state Human Rights Advisory Council, which was headed by Kaboglu. 
He and Oran were indicted over the document in 2005 on charges of "inciting hatred and enmity" and "insulting the judiciary", with prosecutors demanding a five-year prison sentence for both. 
In May 2006, a court in Ankara pronounced them not guilty on the first charge, and dropped the charge stemming from the controversial Article 301 in Turkey's penal code, which penalises the public denigration of Turkishness or state authorities and institutions. 
On Thursday, Turkey's Supreme Court of Appeals decided that the report by Oran, a professor of international relations at Ankara University, and Kaboglu, a professor of law at Istanbul's Marmara University, constituted a threat to the state. 
"Creation and recognition of a new minority ... would endanger the unitary state and the nation's indivisibility," the AFP quoted the court's ruling as saying. 
The judges also decided that by suggesting people be given the right to identify themselves as members of different ethnic groups along with their Turkish citizenship, the academics had overstepped the limits of freedom of expression. 
"With this recommendation, the report has stepped over the boundaries of criticism and freedom of thought, and its accusatory content borders on a threat to social peace," they said in the ruling, which could conceivably land the two academics back in court. 
The appeals court's ruling comes amid mounting EU pressure on Turkey to step up democratic reforms aimed at improving religious and minority rights, and to change or abolish legislation that infringes on freedom of expression, including Article 301. 
Turkish officials have suggested that a new constitution the ruling Justice and Development Party plans to propose by the end of this year will likely include provisions that could help deal with the much criticised Article 301. 
"The decision comes at a time when discussions are being held on writing a new civilian constitution," Oran, who ran as an independent candidate in the July 22nd parliamentary elections, told Zaman daily on Thursday. "The definition of citizenship planned to be included in the new constitution is totally in line with what we had offered in that report, saying that "Turkishness" should not be a part of that definition." 
