23/08/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 23/08/05
The Bulgarian Army on Monday (22 August) joined efforts to rebuild houses and infrastructure damaged by floods that have devastated some areas this summer. 
More than 20 groups of military personnel -- trained to assist the public in the affected locations -- have been set up, Army Chief-of-Staff General Nikola Kolev said Friday, announcing a recovery plan drawn up last week. A total of 900 men, equipped with 150 specialised transport units, are involved in the operation, which will last until 31 October. Weather permitting, the work will continue beyond that date, the new Defence Minister Vesselin Bliznakov said Monday. 
Under the plan, the army will help reconstruct about 69km of dikes, clean up 58km of riverbeds and clear more than 8km of roads. The military will also build about 30 temporary houses and more than 450m of bridges. The army also stands ready to join efforts for the reconstruction of damaged railway tracks, according to local media reports. 
Bliznakov explained Monday that the army's effort would cost nearly 3.3m euros. The military has cancelled several drills to free up about 350,000 euros in support of the operation. 
Flooding that hit the country in the past months following the worst torrential rains in at least 50 years affected more than a quarter of Bulgaria's population of 7.5 million people. According to a rapid health assessment conducted by the WHO last month, the disaster has caused at least 20 deaths and an estimated 515m euros in damage. The cost of the damage to the infrastructure alone totals about 175m euros. The state railway company has sustained losses of about 78m euros. Some 14,000 houses across the country have been severely damaged and 238 have been destroyed. 
On Monday, authorities began providing aid to families left homeless, to help them cover at least part of their losses. Each family can receive up to about 500 euros in assistance. 
"With 20,000 people in Bulgaria in need of food, bedding, hepatitis vaccine, antibiotics and insect repellent due to heavy flooding, UN agencies are continuing to provide emergency aid," the world organisation said in a statement Thursday. 
UNICEF has provided blankets, kitchen utensils, water purification tablets and oral rehydration salts, while the UN Office for the Co-ordination of Humanitarian Affairs has provided a grant of more than 24,500 euros for emergency response co-ordination. 
Environmental experts say the torrential rains, compounded by inefficient and inappropriate ecological measures, caused the disastrous floods. Factors that increased their destructive force included the improper modification and narrowing of riverbeds and forest clearing. 
"Forests are no longer a buffer, which consumes the surplus of water," environmental expert Boris Burov told the private channel bTV on Sunday. "Therefore rainfalls of huge quantities flow uncontrollably into the valleys to join rivers, which were unnaturally modified and have no capacity to assume the tidal wave." 
