14/01/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times – 14/01/08
A Macedonian Army helicopter transporting 11 soldiers who were returning from a tour of duty with the EU mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina crashed near the capital, Skopje, on Saturday (January 12th), killing all on board. The helicopter had just started procedures to land at the Alexander the Great Airport in foggy conditions when residents of the nearby village, Blace, heard an explosion. The helicopter crashed less than 50m from houses, but there were no casualties from among the local population. 
The first to report the crash to the police were two local fishermen who saw the helicopter flying unusually low. "The engine of the helicopter did not sound like it worked well and suddenly we heard an explosion that shook our house," said one witness. "We went outside and saw that up the hill there was a huge fire. One man was thrown outside the helicopter. Suddenly a series of explosions began from the kerosene or from the ammunition. We all moved aside, because we could not do anything to help." 
Immediately after the accident, Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, Interior Minister Gordana Jankulovska and President Branko Crvenkovski arrived at the scene. 
"This is a huge accident, a big tragedy and a great loss," Crvenkovski said. "I express my deepest and sincerest condolences to the families of the victims. An investigation is starting that will identify the cause of the accident." 
The interior ministry found the helicopter's three black boxes in the wreckage Sunday. These will be sent to another country for analysis. According to the ministry of defence, they are not standard black boxes, but instruments that will provide precise information in a very short time. 
Experts from the interior ministry took blood and urine samples for analysis from the air flight controller who was on duty at the time of the accident. The ministry also took the tapes of conversations between the air traffic controller and the helicopter pilots from the airport's flight control. 
The ministry of defence announced the names of the 11 victims Sunday. A memorial service is being held on Monday at the House of Army in Skopje. 
