28/04/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times -- 28/04/05
A bill proposing to lease or allow the commercial use of dozens of Olympic venues in Athens was tabled by parliament on 15 April. The proposal aims to recover at least part of the more than 9 billion euros spent for hosting the 2004 Summer Olympics. None of the 36 sites, whose construction or renovation costs exceeded 3 billion euros, will be sold, a Greek official said. 
 "The time has come for the gigantic financial investment made for the Olympic Games to pay off a 'capital gains' reward for the Greek people," said Deputy Culture Minister Fani Palli-Petralia. 
She was in charge of Olympic preparations and is responsible for finding investors for the post-Olympic use of venues. Palli-Petralia said that she has had "constructive" dialogue with local governments over the past few weeks. 
Facing an already huge budget deficit, the country must set aside 80m euros a year for the proper maintenance of the sites. Only a few of them have been used since the Games ended in September 2004. 
 The bill seeks to boost economic growth and transparency, create new jobs and to raise the quality of life of Greek citizens, Palli-Petralia told reporters. If passed by parliament, the law will allow investors to use the facilities as cultural centres, conference and exhibition halls, restaurants and shops. 
"The profits from commercial usage will create great social benefits and at the same time guard the public character of the facilities," the AP quoted Palli-Petralia as saying. "Nothing is for sale and nothing will be sold." 
One of the proposals being considered envisions the transformation of the Hellenikon sports complex into a park. The sports facilities at the second largest Olympic site, according to Reuters, would be used for cultural purposes, restaurants and cafes. 
Another proposal is to turn the land near the Olympic equestrian centre at Markopoulo just outside Athens into an 18-hole golf course and a heliport. Still another is to use the Aghios Cosmas Sailing Centre as a marina with a 1,200-boat capacity and to turn the yachting complex into a five-star hotel with 30 rooms. 
The baseball and softball stadiums and the hockey pitches are expected to be used for open-air concerts or other cultural events and public gatherings. 
The new legislation "clearly establishes the role of the state, the role of private investors and the role of local communities in this plan," the Greek daily Kathimerini quoted Palli-Petralia as saying. Investors, according to the paper, would pay a 2 per cent tax, which would benefit local government organisations. 
