09/03/2006
(International Crisis Group, Reuters - 08/03/06)
With few signs of prospects for a negotiated settlement to the Cyprus issue, the relevant domestic and international players could take a number of unilateral actions to move the peace process forward, the International Crisis Group (ICG) said in a report released Wednesday (8 March). 
The document, titled "The Cyprus Stalemate: What Next?", voices concern about the Greek Cypriot authorities' "uncompromising attitudes" and "unhelpful blocking role in the EU", and warns of possible consequences. 
"The Greek Cypriot leadership must realise that if they persist in their refusal to engage with the UN and other international partners on the basis of the Annan plan, then the likely result is not a more centralised union, but permanent partition and the independence of the north," the group's president, Gareth Evans, said. 
The influential advisory body's report outlines measures domestic and international officials could take to maintain support for a solution among Turkish Cypriots, induce political change in the Greek-run south, and advance intercommunal reconciliation. 
The government of Cyprus should re-engage with the UN-sponsored peace process, the ICG says, urging Nicosia to respond to Annan's request and submit a prioritised list of concerns about the plan, which the community rejected in 2004. 
The report also calls on Greek Cypriot opposition figures, moderates on all political sides, and civil society leaders to initiate a new debate over the future of the island and support measures to boost the economic development of northern Cyprus and reduce its isolation. 
The Turkish Cypriots, according to the ICG, should ensure that the procedures applied by their property commission are in line with the European Convention on Human Rights and reinstate Greek Cypriot property in a refurbished Varosha under Turkish Cypriot administration. 
Other actions the Turkish Cypriot authorities are urged to take include bringing trade and public sector reform into line with EU standards and adopting the Common External Tariff. They should also pursue confidence building measures and to continue efforts to resolve the 2,500 cases of missing persons, the ICG report says. 
Any construction work on property owned by Greek Cypriots must cease, the report adds, recommending the initiation of plans for the establishment of mixed population villages wherever possible. 
 The report calls on Greece to actively support Greek Cypriot pro-settlement voices and a renewal of the peace negotiations on the basis of the Annan plan. Athens should also suspend its Joint Defence Space doctrine, "cease joint military activities with the Greek Cypriots and stop participating in the operations and staffing of the Cypriot National Guard", it says. 
Turkey, according to the ICG, should implement the Customs Union with all 25 EU member states, begin a limited withdrawal of Turkish troops from Cyprus's north and commit to repatriating a number of Turkish settlers. 
The report urges the EU to move towards ending the isolation of northern Cyprus. The bloc, it adds, should exercise pressure on the Greek Cypriot authorities to accept "committing the Union to proceed on the trade regulation" and implementing the aid regulation for northern Cyprus. 
The UN should adopt the conclusions in Annan's May 2004 report on Cyprus "as a Security Council resolution to strengthen the UN's calls to end the isolation of northern Cyprus", the report says. It also recommends the establishment of a Trust Fund for Northern Cyprus under the UNDP. 
