09/08/2007
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 09/08/07
For years now, a fierce debate has been waged over the exchange rate of the Serbian dinar in relation to the euro. One camp wants to see a weaker dinar, allowing Serbia to export more goods and stimulate its economy. Others, worried about the prospects of inflation, want to keep rates stable. Ordinary citizens, meanwhile, would like to see the dinar appreciate, as this would help them pay off loans tied to the euro. 
Those counting on the dinar's rise had their hopes buoyed for a brief period recently. In late June, the domestic currency shot upwards, rising 2.66% in the space of ten days. While debtors and importers celebrated, exporters fretted. Analysts worried that the domestic currency could spiral out of control, damaging the already frail Serbian economy. Faced with potentially huge losses, some exchange offices put a hold on the sale of euros until the situation stabilised. 
By early July, the euro reverted to its earlier level of around 81.5 dinars. Exporters and some economists, however, are not satisfied. They would like the central bank to reduce the dinar's value further. 
 Bozidar Djelic, the vice president of the Serbian government, sees no need for a change in monetary policy. Rather, he says, the aim should be to find common ground between monetary and fiscal policy, allowing low inflation as well as high industrial growth. 
The position of the National Bank of Serbia and its governor Radovan Jelasic -- whose mandate was confirmed by the new Serbian parliament -- is clear. The central bank's principal goal is low inflation. According to the governor, if exporters wish to increase exports they should develop production, improve the quality of their products and production efficiency and should not base their hopes on exchange rate differences. 
Official statistics appear to bolster Jelasic's view. According to the data, Serbian exports have increased even as the dinar remained comparatively high and the euro slipped. 
In the first five months of the year, exports rose 33.4%, although imports also were higher by 28.8%. Key exports include iron and steel, coloured metals, clothing and grains. Imports include petrol and natural gas, automobiles, trucks, machines and iron. 
Many economists do not view exchange rates as the most important factor governing Serbian export levels. Rather, they argue, exports are being held back by poor packaging, failure to honour deadlines and production issues. 
Serbia's trade deficit remains high, with a 25% increase during the first few months of the year. A weaker euro, combined with rising demand for foreign products, has widened the gap. 
In the short term, some economists say, the influx of cheap imports is beneficial, since otherwise demand would drive prices of domestic products upwards, possibly triggering an inflationary crisis. Serbs still remember carrying nine-digit bills in their wallets during the nineties. Few wish to repeat such a scenario. 
