16/11/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times – 16/11/07
On November 11th, a Turkish-flagged cargo ship carrying 275 illegal immigrants was towed safely to the Greek shore after it was caught in rough seas off the coast of south-western Greece. Dozens of women and children from Iraq had been aboard the ship for 13 days. 
During a key visit of Turkey's Coast Guard Commander, Rear Admiral Can Erenoglu, to Athens last week, the two countries agreed to launch a new communication mechanism between their coast guards to curb the illegal immigration affecting both counties. 
The agreement outlines the establishment of a secure system, which will enable the coast guard units to exchange online information about suspected vessels and persons involved in illegal immigration. 
Greece is having difficulty coping with the sharp rise in illegal immigrants attempting to enter Europe through Greek islands and the shores of the Aegean. Thousands of Asians, Africans and Iraqis are trying to cross the Aegean Sea each year, paying thousands of US dollars to mafia groups. Their dangerous journey often ends tragically; many die or end up apprehended by security forces. 
Greek security forces arrested approximately 8,000 illegal immigrants in 2005 on the country's eastern land and the sea borders. This number increased to 22,000 in 2006 and to 18,000 in the first eight months of this year. 
Earlier this year, Greece accused Turkey of failing to do enough to stop illegal immigrants and of not acting constructively in the repatriation of illegal immigrants intercepted by its border forces. 
Turkey, on the other hand, said it can accept repatriation of illegal immigrants arrested by Greek forces only if it is clearly documented that these people have entered Greece from Turkish territories or territorial waters. 
Greece has demanded the repatriation of 22,000 illegal immigrants to Turkey in the last four years, but Ankara has accepted only approximately 4,000 of them. Ankara has said that according to an agreement between the two countries signed in 2000 and an annexed protocol dated 2001, Greece must pay the repatriation costs. 
Turkey's General Staff accused the Greek government in October of treating arrested illegal immigrants unfairly. According to a statement on the government's website, around 12,000 illegal immigrants arrested by Greek forces were brought back to Turkish territorial waters and left to fend for themselves. Most were Asians, Africans and Iraqis. 
Despite all the accusations by both parties, Erenoglu said Ankara is eager to make progress with Greece on the confidence-building measures. "We are aware that illegal immigrants influence ties between us as it is also a security issue," he said after meeting with Merchant Marine Minister Giorgos Voulgarakis. 
Turkey and Greece are traditional rivals, but political relations have drastically improved in recent years, despite ongoing disagreement on airspace and territorial waters. The decades-old division of Cyprus is the biggest obstacle to strengthened co-operation, and has also impacted Turkey's bid to join the EU. 
