14/03/2005
(FT, AP - 14/03/05; AP, Reuters, BBC, VOA, Fena, Radio B92 - 13/03/05)
Nearly nine years after he was charged with war crimes by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), a former Bosnian Serb paramilitary leader flew to The Hague on Monday (14 March) to face justice. 
During the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Gojko Jankovic, 50, served as a sub-commander of the military police and as one of the main paramilitary leaders in Foca, a town southeast of Sarajevo. The ICTY originally indicted him for war crimes in 1996, along with several others. 
An amended indictment in April 2001 charged Jankovic with individual and superior criminal responsibility for seven counts of crimes against humanity and seven counts of violations of the laws or customs of war, both for torture and rape. 
UN prosecutors allege that after overtaking Foca in April 1992, Serb forces and military police started arresting Bosnian Muslim and Croat civilians, many of whom were killed, beaten or sexually assaulted during detention. 
"Muslim women, children and the elderly were detained in houses, apartments and motels in the town of Foca and in surrounding villages, or at short and long-term detention centres," an ICTY summary of the charges against Jankovic and another former paramilitary officer, Dragan Zelenovic, reads. Many of the women and girls were raped and were subjected to humiliating, unhygienic and degrading conditions, as well as to brutal beatings. "Several women were detained in houses and apartments used as brothels, operated by groups of soldiers, mostly paramilitary," The Hague court said. 
Jankovic, the sixth Serb or Bosnian Serb suspect to turn himself in voluntarily to the ICTY since January, departed for The Hague from Banja Luka amid heavy police security. Republika Srpska Interior Minister Darko Matijasevic accompanied him. 
The Serbian government hailed the move in a statement Sunday, saying Jankovic intended "to help his people and contribute to the fulfillment of international obligations". 
According to ICTY President Theodor Meron, the recent series of surrenders is the result of the mounting pressure on governments in the region to meet their obligations towards the UN tribunal. 
"The international community has pressured governments in the region very, very hard to comply with the court's orders,'' Meron told the AP on Friday. Yet 16 war crime indictees remain at large, including the tribunal's three most wanted fugitives -- wartime Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic and retired Croat General Ante Gotovina. More than a dozen of the indictees are believed to be in Serbia. 
