06/01/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 06/01/05
The international community's top envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), High Representative Paddy Ashdown, was in Belgrade on Wednesday (5 January) and said that co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague is a part of the Dayton Agreement that must be respected. He stressed that Republika Srpska (RS) is not fulfilling this requirement. 
In almost ten years since the signing of Dayton, RS authorities have not arrested a single indictee, Ashdown told Serbian President Boris Tadic, emphasising Belgrade's importance to the process of bringing alleged war criminals to justice. 
"Belgrade plays a key role not only in fulfilling its obligations to the tribunal, but also in co-operation with the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, including those in RS, regarding the extradition of war crimes indictees, who have been freely crossing the Serbian border," he said. 
Although some within RS are signaling a new approach to co-operation, Ashdown said, this is not enough. "There must be results and RS bears the greatest responsibility for producing them," he said. 
The international envoy's visit to Belgrade follows his decision last month to impose sanctions against RS in response to disclosures that the entity is not only failing to arrest indictees, but is continuing to protect them. Evidence has surfaced recently that former Bosnian Serb military chief Ratko Mladic, one of the tribunal's top three indictees, was sheltered at an RS military bunker during the summer and celebrated an army holiday with military personnel. 
If Bosnia and Herzegovina wishes to continue towards the Euro-Atlantic integration and secure benefits for its citizens -- such as a no-visa regime, guaranteed security and free access to the world's largest markets -- then RS must demonstrate a stronger will for reforms, Ashdown said. 
Indicating that April is the deadline for the entity to improve its co-operation, Ashdown said he is convinced the RS leadership is now truly determined to do so. 
While in Belgrade, Ashdown also met with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Serbia-Montenegro Foreign Minister Vuk Draskovic. The high representative said Kostunica pledged to "actively and energetically" support Banja Luka in boosting co-operation with The Hague. 
In comments following his talks with Ashdown, Draskovic stressed the state union's strong support for the Dayton Agreement, "because this country is a signatory to the agreement and because we represented RS in Dayton". He added that the document could be altered only with the consent of all three constitutive peoples. 
For his part, Ashdown said he had no intention of taking unilateral steps to change RS's status, but emphasised that the entity's future depends on implementing its international obligations, especially co-operation with the tribunal. 
"To abolish RS is neither my decision, nor my goal, but those who wish to be protected by the Dayton Accords must honour all provisions of the agreement. They cannot choose which parts of the agreement they like and which they do not like," Ashdown said. 
