07/09/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/09/11
Marking its 50th anniversary, the Non-Aligned Movement returned this year to Belgrade -- the city of its birth. The two-day gathering began on Monday (September 5th), with 600 delegates from over 100 countries in attendance. 
The world map has changed radically since the movement got its start, but members say it remains relevant despite the end of the Cold War and its bipolar world order. 
"The movement has evolved and continues to be developed," said the movement's president, Egyptian Foreign Minister Amr Mohamed Kamel. "From 25 members in 1961, it now has 130, which is two thirds of all the nations in the world." 
Although the former Yugoslavia played a pivotal role in its formation, none of the successor states is a member. Host nation Serbia is an observer country, as are Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia. 
"Our intention is to raise to a higher level of political and economic co-operation with the proud countries that are with us today in Belgrade," Serbian President Boris Tadic told conference participants, adding that his country remains committed to the principles of non-alignment. 
With countries in the movement constituting a market of around two billion people, officials say there is much at stake. 
"The military industry is the backbone of co-operation between Serbia and the non-aligned," Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovic told SETimes. "From co-operation with Algeria and Iraq alone we get $800m." 
Some, however, see links with the movement as a liability rather than an asset. 
"Approaching the non-aligned is a denial of the need that Serbia belongs to the Euro-Atlantic civilisation," history professor Nikola Samardzic told SETimes. "The EU is obliged to present concrete pressure on the establishment of Serbia to help citizens get rid of their mistakes stemming from nationalism and communism." 
The challenge for Serbian diplomacy was evident this week when conference participants strongly backed the formation of an independent Palestine. With the UN General Assembly set this month to consider the admission of Palestine into the UN, support from the non-aligned movement could be decisive. 
"As hosts, we had no intention of opening this political issue at the Nonaligned conference, but member states wanted to discuss it," Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic told SETimes. "Serbia is not a member of the Non-aligned Movement, but we are joining with their stance." 
Serbia has good relations with Israel and experts appeared confident these would not be endangered. 
"We hope that the friendly country of Israel will understand this attitude of Serbia, as the non-aligned conference host cannot be against the will of most members of the movement," political analyst Milan Nikolic told SETimes. 
Founded in 1961, the Non-Aligned Movement was the brain child of former Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito, India's Jawaharlal Nehru, Egypt's Gamal Abdel Nasser, Indonesia's Sukarno, and Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana. 
Tito's grandson, Communist Party head Joska Broz, says he was not even invited. 
"The government is hypocritical," he said, "having organised in May a meeting of the NATO Alliance, and now a meeting of the non-aligned. While such people are in power, Serbia will not be well." 
