06/09/2004
By Fatih Baran for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 06/09/04
Drawing on voter discontent over poverty and unemployment, the Justice and Development Party (AKP) swept to victory in Turkey's general election on 3 November, 2002. It was formed three years ago by well-known figures belonging to the moderate wing of the Welfare Party, an Islamist party that was banned on charges of being a focus of Islamic militancy. 
Party leader and current Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan was once sentenced to jail for Islamic sedition, and the AKP continues to be viewed with wariness by Turkish liberals and the country's secularist military. Erdogan, however, denies that the party is Islamist, saying it is committed to pro-Western, pro-EU policies. 
After years of chronic political and economic instability, Turks were fed up with unfulfilled promises and half-measures taken by a succession of two and three-party coalitions. At the time of the general election, Turkey was suffering its worst economic slump in 40 years, with more than 2 million unemployed. Voters flocked to a party that seemed to offer a substantial change. The AKP garnered 362 out of 550 parliamentary seats and established Turkey's first one-party government in decades. 
Improvements followed. Although Turkey's economic plights did not vanish altogether, co-operation with the IMF and a series of austerity measures paved the way for economic stability alongside political stability. Annual inflation has fallen from 57.8 per cent in 2001 to a projected 12 per cent this year. In January 2005, Turkey will redenominate its currency, removing six zeroes from the Turkish lira -- a change expected to boost the country's position in international markets. 
Meanwhile, the AKP-led government has undertaken sweeping reforms aimed at securing membership talks with the EU. Its parliamentary majority has enabled it to pass a series of measures guaranteeing individual freedom, abolishing the death penalty, establishing education and broadcasting in minority languages, overhauling the judiciary and weeding out corruption in public administration. The government also moved to curb the political power of the country's military, naming a civilian to head the influential National Security Council. While the reforms have won international praise, some point to lack of implementation as a continuing problem. 
"Shoulder to Shoulder" is the motto chosen by the AKP as the party marks its third anniversary. The government credits itself with restoring Turkish confidence in politics and with ending the economic crisis -- an assessment with which many would agree. Despite these achievements, however, secularists remain concerned about AKP's long-term goals. 
