16/12/2010
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 16/12/10
Nearly 200 soldiers, including serving generals and former heads of the navy and air force, go on trial Thursday (December 16th) in Istanbul, charged with planning to oust Turkey's Islamic-leaning government. 
Supporters of the investigation into the alleged plot view it as a vital step in rooting out criminal elements within a military that has toppled four governments since 1960. However inconsistencies in evidence have led some analysts to question whether it should have come to trial at all. 
Code-named "Operation Sledgehammer", the alleged coup plan was discovered in January when an anonymous source handed over a suitcase of documents, CDs and audiotapes to the Taraf daily newspaper. 
The materials detailed a secret plan drawn up by high-ranking military officers to launch bomb attacks on two Istanbul mosques and to down a Turkish fighter jet over the Aegean Sea. According to the indictment, they hoped to "pave the way for a military takeover by plunging the country into chaos and unrest". 
If convicted, the defendants face between 15 and 20 years imprisonment for "attempting to overthrow the government or prevent it from carrying out its duties, through the use of force and violence". 
Some analysts, such as human rights lawyer Orhan Kemal Cengiz, view the trial as a "confrontation with history" that will help lay to rest Turkey's coup-ridden past. 
"It's very important because it's the first time we've actually put these soldiers and generals on trial before they actually attempt a coup d'etat," he told SETimes. 
But anachronisms and inconsistencies in the alleged coup documents released in the indictment lead others to cast the entire trial in doubt. 
One CD containing the alleged coup plan, which according to the indictment was created in 2003, refers to hospitals, NGOs and military facilities by names they did not have at that time. 
A colonel accused of attending a coup-plotting seminar is listed in supposedly original documents under a middle name not officially registered until 2007. 
 "Anybody with two brain cells to rub together can see that these have been faked," said Gareth Jenkins, a Turkey-based analyst familiar with the indictment. 
He believes fear and self-censorship have stifled domestic discussion of the problems with the Sledgehammer evidence. "In any other country that would be enough for the case to collapse," Jenkins told SETimes. 
Critics also accuse Turkey's government of manipulating the case as part of its long-running battle with the powerful and staunchly secular military -- a charge it denies. 
The Supreme Board of Judges and Prosecutors, reorganised in September following a referendum, drew criticism from defence lawyers this week for transferring the head judge, Zafer Baskurt, off the case two days before the trial began. 
 "The head judge studied for about four months; he [developed] an opinion about the case," defence lawyer Celal Ulgen told the daily newspaper Hurriyet. "It will take time for the new head of the court to be able to [understand] the case. Such a change should not have happened." 
Some believe that Baskurt's removal was politically motivated. He had previously opposed the ongoing detention of suspects while the trial was pending. 
"This is smelling very bad," said Yusuf Kanli, a commentator for Hurriyet. "But on the other hand, we have to stand firm. If there are people involved in illegality and involved in crime, whether it's a simple crime or a coup operation, they have to be punished." 
