11/10/2011
By Igor Jovanovic and Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 11/10/11 
EU mediator Robert Cooper was in Belgrade and Pristina this week to discuss salvaging the Belgrade-Pristina talks. However, despite his efforts, no concrete progress was made. 
While Belgrade has insisted that the two sides revisit the crisis in northern Kosovo, and solve problems at Jarinje and Brnjak crossings, Pristina said those issues are no longer negotiable. 
Kosovo wants to continue the dialogue with Belgrade on matters of telecommunications, electric power and representation of Kosovo in international meetings. 
"Kosovo is ready to [hold] dialogue with all its neighbors in order to solve practical inter-state problems," Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said Monday (October 10th), after a meeting with Cooper. 
Belgrade and Kosovo Serbs strongly opposed the arrival of the Kosovo police and customs officers at the crossings in northern Kosovo, demanding that only the representatives of international missions stay at the crossings. Serbs from the north blocked all important roads in that part in Kosovo on September 16th, when Kosovo officials arrived at the customs checkpoints. 
Pristina does not want to give up the right to have its own customs at the northern crossings in the area inhabited by Serbs. 
Kosovo has shown responsibility in the dialogue process and it has "a clear platform with red lines, which are independence, territorial integrity and internal regulation of Kosovo", Thaci said. 
Cooper visited Belgrade on Friday (October 7th), where he talked with the head of the Serbian negotiating team Borislav Stefanovic. Although the Belgrade representative said Serbia couldn't speak on technical issues during the crisis in the north, he was more optimistic than before. 
"Compared to the last talks in Brussels, we are closer to agreement today. We had a good conversation about the crossings, which is a sign that Belgrade is on the way to solving problems," said Stefanovic. 
Serbian government spokesman Milivoje Mihajlovic told SETimes that after Cooper's visit to Pristina, it was "clear that the Kosovo side is the one that tries to interrupt the dialogue". 
"When the house is on the fire, one should talk about how to put out the fire, not about which flowers will be grown in the garden. That is why we should firstly solve the crisis in the north and talk about the electricity after," Mihajlovic said. 
However, Kosovo analyst Agron Bajrami says the "so-called technical dialogue is dead". 
Bajrami told SETimes that it is a failed process for Kosovo because what was expected has not been achieved, such as free movement, access to Kosovo documents "stolen" by Serbia, energy issues and telecommunications. 
"Even [issues] on which, it has been said, that there is an agreement, we do not see positive results on the ground," Bajrami said. 
Belgrade analyst Dusan Janjic says that Serbia will be marked as the culprit for the problems in the dialogue because Kosovo has the support of the most influential Western states. 
"That is why it is so important for Serbia to present solutions for the security crisis in the north and resolve them with the EU and NATO as soon as possible. Also, Belgrade should give up the idea of partitioning Kosovo," Janjic told SETimes. 
Janjic criticized the EU for poorly organising the talks, saying that clear rules in the dialogue were never established, especially on the criteria for negotiations and sanctions for those who violate the agreements. 
Belul Beqaj, a political commentator in Pristina, says dialogue will continue. 
"It will continue because the intention now is dialogue in itself, not its results," Beqaj told SETimes. He also said that Kosovo is "collateral damage for Serbia on its way towards EU integration. This is collateral damage that Serbia has to solve." 
