15/03/2005
(Newsweek - 21/03/05; Ziua, Pressreview.ro - 15/03/05; Dow Jones, AP, AFP, Rompres - 14/03/05)
The Romanian government said Monday (14 March) that it needs more time to iron out differences with the IMF over the size of the country's 2005 budget deficit. The authorities are hoping to convince the Fund's experts that a gap of 0.7 per cent of GDP is feasible. A lower deficit, they argue, could impede implementation of reforms required for the country's EU entry in January 2007. 
An IMF mission is due to visit Bucharest this month for a regular quarterly review of a 24-month, $367m precautionary stand-by arrangement, in effect since July 2004. 
The introduction of a flat 16 per cent income tax rate for both Romanian corporations and individuals in early January has sparked concern among IMF experts, who warn it could lead to lower revenues and additional inflationary pressures, compounding those already created by last year's higher-than-expected salary increases in the public sector. The deficit for 2005 should be kept between 0.4 per cent and 0.5 per cent of GDP, they say. 
"Negotiations will continue and I am confident we can reach an agreement with the IMF by the end of April," the AFP quoted Deputy Prime Minister Adriean Videanu as saying Monday. 
"It is true there are differences in the evaluation of the presumed effects of the measures already taken and those that will be adopted by the government," said government spokeswoman Oana Marinescu. According to her, the 0.7 per cent budget deficit the measures were expected to produce would still allow "a solid macroeconomic balance". 
The government argues that tax collection over the past few months was 12 per cent higher than the same period last year, predicting this trend will continue during the coming months. It also views the IMF's 5.3 per cent economic growth estimate for this year as too low. 
While Romania needs the IMF's approval of its economic programme, failure to implement EU-required reforms could delay the country's entry by one year, until January 2008. Lack of agreement with the Fund on economic parameters would not, however, block the signing of Romania's accession treaty with the Union on 25 April, Videanu said. 
European Commission officials in Bucharest said Monday that while there is no "formal link" between Romania's EU accession and the status of its stand-by arrangement with the Fund, "a stable macroeconomic framework" remains a key indicator of a country's preparedness for membership. 
