28/12/2009
(DPA - 28/12/09; Reuters - 27/12/09; AFP, EurActiv, European Voice - 18/12/09; Europolitics, EurActiv - 15/12/09; AFP, AP, DPA, BBC, VOA - 01/12/09; Reuters - 30/11/09; Official Website of the Spanish EU Presidency)
Spain takes over the rotating six-month EU presidency from Sweden on Friday (January 1st), a month after the long-debated Lisbon Treaty entered into force, introducing a set of new rules and marking the start of a new era for the Union. 
Aimed at streamlining EU decision-making and boosting the 27-nation bloc's influence on the global stage, the treaty also created two key posts -- a full-time president and a more powerful foreign policy chief. 
Former Belgian Prime Minister Herman Van Rompuy will formally begin his two-and-half year mandate as EU president, or president of the European Council as is the official title, on Friday. Britain's Catherine Ashton will assume her duties as the bloc's high representative for foreign affairs and security policy that same day. 
Ahead of the start of its fourth stint at the EU helm since it joined the Union in 1986, Spain said earlier this month that it will work in close co-operation with Belgium and Hungary, the next two presidency holders. The trio's goal will be to ensure greater consistency in leadership. 
Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Moratinos said on December 18th that Madrid recognises the primacy of Van Rompuy and Ashton's positions within the new EU architecture and is not planning to compete with them, but to support them. 
"The engagement of the prime minister of Spain and of the entire Spanish government is that we have new European representatives who will lead, give momentum and will steer [the bloc] through the first semester of 2010," Brussels-based EurActiv quoted him as saying. "Spain will not abandon its responsibility ... but we will do it with modesty, with discretion, through our work and our support." 
Unveiling the agenda of the Spanish EU presidency, Moratinos cited four main priorities, foremost among them full and effective implementation of the Lisbon Treaty. 
Madrid "will take due steps to instigate the regulations necessary to develop the Treaty and, in particular, to establish the European External Action Service", according to the official programme of the Spanish EU presidency. "It is also our goal to consolidate a balanced working format to ensure that the rotating presidencies become an efficient and complementary tool for the new institutions." 
While the government in Madrid will play a key role in preparing EU meetings, Van Rompuy will be the one who will chair summits, speak to the press and steer the bloc's agenda. Spanish Prime Minister Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero will chair some lower-level meetings. 
Likewise, Ashton will preside over the EU foreign ministers' meetings. Moratinos will only co-chair with her the informal two-day gathering of the bloc's top diplomats opening in Cordoba on March 5th. 
Another key priority listed in the programme of the Spanish EU presidency will be "to guarantee the economic recovery of Europe through greater co-ordination of every member state and the approval of the European strategy for sustainable growth for 2020". 
The other two important priorities Spain will focus on during its six-month term will be strengthening the 27-nation bloc's presence and influence on the world stage, as well as placing European citizens at the centre of the bloc's policy, with particular attention to gender equality. 
In regard to EU enlargement, Spain has made clear that it wants to see Croatia's accession talks wrapped up before the end of June, when it will hand over the rotating presidency to Belgium, and has voiced support for Turkey's progress in its negotiation process. Madrid has also pledged to make efforts towards resolving the long-standing name dispute between Macedonia and Greece, to pave the way for the launch of EU membership talks with Skopje. 
