11/05/2012
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 11/05/12
The Atletico Madrid-Athletic Bilbao Europa League final hosted on Wednesday (May 9th) by the National Arena in Bucharest was an unprecedented show for the Romanian capital in all its aspects: on the pitch and outside the stadium. The match, won by Atletico Madrid by 3-0, delighted about 53,000 fans in the 240m euros stadium inaugurated last fall. But the real fiesta was out in the streets, with about 30,000 Spanish fans from the two cities filling pubs and restaurants and bringing hotels under a genuine siege. 
They were the highest number of foreign tourists Bucharest has ever hosted, the Federation of the Employers in the Romanian Tourism (FPTR) has announced. A total of 10m euros were cashed by the FPTR tourism operators after the occupancy rate of the hotels in Bucharest reached 95% on Wednesday night, buoyed by 10,000 Romanians from other parts of the country coming to Bucharest to see the final. 
As concerns the municipality, which administers National Arena and public transportation, about 28m euros went into the accounts of the mayoralty, Bucharest mayor Sorin Oprescu announced on Thursday. “I am glad the international media lauded the way we organised this match and we also proved we are civilized,” Oprescu said, alluding to the fact no incident was recorded before, during or after the final. About 6,000 policemen, gendarmes and firemen were mobilised for the big event. Air traffic at the Otopeni International Airport increased by 50% on the day of the match. 
Pub owners in downtown Bucharest rub their hands with satisfaction. “This I have never seen. It all went beyond my wildest expectations,” Robert Dumitrascu, a 43 year old pub manager, told SETimes. “At a certain point, I had run out of supplies and had a hard time renewing them due to the very high demand. I wish we had such a major sport event at least every a couple of years,” he added. A total 200,000 liters of beer were drunk by the football fans, Spanish and Romanians alike, statistics show. 
The event was unprecedented in the country, sport commentators confirm. “Romania has not seen such a major sport event since 1981 when it hosted the Summer Universiade, a student sport competition where 86 countries were represented,” Daniel Contescu, senior sport editor with the Romanian newspaper Evenimentul Zilei, told SETimes. 
It all comes down to infrastructure, Contescu further explained. “Had Romania had a better sport infrastructure, such events could have happened earlier. The new five star stadium is a major step forwards in this regard and has the potential to be the venue of big sport events in the future,” he underlined. 
No incident was recorded during the fiesta in the streets or during the match. But the show on the pitch was total, fans confirm. “A lesson our football players and tycoons should learn from the Spanish: that football is first of all about show and not money,” computer engineer Adrian Dobrescu, 36, told SETimes. 
The Romanian football has been for years embroiled in a series of scandals involving rigged games by club owners and violence during the matches. The match on Wednesday evening was especially welcomed by the local football fans disappointed the national team has not been able to qualify for the latest two world and European football championships. 
Spanish Crown Prince Felipe attended the match, accompanied by Romanian Prime Minister Victor Ponta, his Moldovan counterpart, Vlad Filat, and Michel Platini, president of the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA). The match was also projected on a giant screen in Constitutional Square neighbouring former communist dictator Nicolae Ceausescu’s People’s Palace, the second largest building in the world. 
