27/02/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Shantek for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 27/02/06
The Serbian government hardly lacks challenges. After being pressured by the IMF last fall into issuing a tender for the privatisation adviser for the Oil Industry of Serbia (NIS), the government created a stir by announcing the selection of a "strategic adviser" for the Electrical Power Industry of Serbia (EPS). 
The move was clearly taken with a view to eventually privatising the company and selling the refineries. According to Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub Labus, the adviser will be required to provide "a concept for the development of the company through restructuring and investments, and to indicate the best privatisation model". 
A $50m credit from the World Bank for restructuring the economy depends on opening this tender, while the future of EPS -- and the price the public will be paying for electricity -- depends on the outcome. The price of electricity could potentially increase two-and-a-half times, but due to subsidies, would remain among the lowest priced in the region. 
It is clear that something must be done with EPS. The company needs to invest 1 billion euros to achieve minimum European environmental standards, but there is no money available for this. Serbia today mostly manages to meet its electrical energy needs, but in five years it will require at least one more thermal-electrical power plant and one more coalmine -- at a cost of 750m euros to 1 billion euros. Because of the government's electric price control policy, EPS does not have the option of raising prices to cover the costs. 
Indeed, electricity prices in Serbia are still kept at a "socialist" level, rather than being determined by the market. EPS pays at least 80m euros annually to import electrical energy, after which it sells the same electrical energy on the domestic market at one third of the market price. 
The World Bank supports efforts to restructure the energy market, but says caution is necessary. According to one of its senior economists, David Kennedy, the Bank does not want privatisation of EPS to take place immediately -- rather, any privatisation scheme should be carefully prepared. 
The government's first steps in this direction have caused an uproar among employee unions and EPS management. They charge that the company -- which employs about 40,000 and is worth several billion euros -- is about to be divided up and auctioned off. The best hydro-electrical power plants and thermal-energy plants will quickly find buyers, as well as the electrical distribution companies with efficient payment collection services. 
Experts, meanwhile, are concerned that the system's efficiency could be affected, and some argue that only vertically integrated systems can guarantee a reliable electrical power supply. This has been an issue elsewhere in Eastern Europe, where Czechs, Hungarians and Poles are attempting once again to integrate their system vertically. It is no different in Bulgaria, where the Czech company CEZ, an owner of power distribution companies and a potential buyer of power generating stations, is conducting the vertical integration. 
