21/01/2009
(Reuters, FT, International Herald Tribune - 21/01/09; AP, AFP, DPA, BBC, VOA, Deutsche Welle, Euronews, Euobserver, HINA, SNA, MIA, Makfax - 20/01/09)
European leaders congratulated Barack Obama on his inauguration as the 44th president of the United States on Tuesday (January 20th), voicing hope for continued steady improvement in transatlantic co-operation and efforts to address the challenges facing the world. 
"Acting together represents one of the best ways to respond to the needs and hopes of peoples on both sides of the Atlantic," the EU's Czech presidency said in a statement. The EU looks forward "to co-operating closely with the new US administration for the steady advancement of the transatlantic partnership and for its continuous adaptation to the tremendous challenges posed by a changing world", it added. 
In Europe, hopes run high that the first African-American US president will bring about improved US-European relations at a time fraught with crises. 
"I personally believe that the election of President Obama was a defining, turning point for America," European Commission (EC) President Jose Manuel Barroso said. "It may now also be an important turning point for the rest of the world." 
He said the EU and the United States should work in partnership to respond to the global financial crisis, the threats to peace and security, and climate change. 
Leaders of the EU's 27 member states extended their congratulations to Obama too. Describing the new US president as "a man of great vision," British Prime Minister Gordon Brown said his inauguration marked a "new chapter in both American... and the world's history". 
France, said President Nicolas Sarkozy, is determined to work hand-in-hand with the United States and is "eager" to see the new president "get to work so we can change the world with him". 
German Chancellor Angela Merkel described Tuesday as a "very special day" not only for the United States but for billions of people as well and voiced hope for more co-operation with Washington. 
"I hope that our co-operation is shaped by ... making decisions on the basis that one country alone cannot solve the world's problems," the German leader said on Tuesday. 
Balkan leaders, including Croatian President Stipe Mesic and the prime ministers of Bulgaria and Macedonia, Sergey Stanishev and Nikola Gruevski, also congratulated Obama and wished him success. 
Mesic wished Obama success and expressed his confidence in the continued development of Croatian-American relations. 
Gruevski thanked the new US leader for his "constant support, encouragement and recognition" of Macedonia's constitutional name and for Skopje's NATO membership bid. 
"We highly appreciate your recognition of our dignity," he wrote to Obama. 
In his inaugural address, Obama said “to all other peoples and governments who are watching today, from the grandest capitals to the small village where my father was born: Know that America is a friend of each nation and every man, woman and child who seeks a future of peace and dignity…”, despite its negotiating two ongoing wars and economic travails
