27/04/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 27/04/09
Kosovo's considerable potential as a destination for tourism remains largely untapped, but local organisations and entrepreneurs are trying to change that. Last week, the first-ever Kosovo Travel Fair was held in Pristina, providing a taste of the country's prospects as a vacation destination. 
Visitors sampled a full range of possibilities -- from spending the weekend in a kulla, or traditional stone fortress, to touring churches and monasteries. Resorts, mountain biking expeditions, wine tours, and traditional cooking were also offered. 
The fair, dubbed "Stay the Weekend, Experience Kosovo", was a venture of the Kosovo Tourism Association (KOTAS), which received support from USAID. 
Prime Minister Hashim Thaci welcomed guests with a speech highlighting the significance of tourism to Kosovo's emerging economy. The authorities "will be focused on increasing the interest in tourism products as a way of increasing the competitiveness of Kosovo businesses and as an [opportunity] to open new jobs", he said. 
Numerous businesses participated in the event, including hotels, restaurants, associations and travel agencies. Companies publicised winter resorts, such as those in the Rugova Gorge, near Prizren in southern Kosovo. The facilities are small but cozy and comfortable. 
Many other firms are specialising in historical tourism, taking visitors to locations such as Decani, where the oldest and most interesting kullas are located. 
 Resembling a small castle, the kulla is a distinctive feature in Kosovo's architectural landscape. After renovations, many now serve as summer camp facilities, cultural or business centres, and restaurants. Some, such as the 18th-century kulla in the village of Dranoc, accommodate bed-and-breakfasts. 
In addition to finding out about destinations and activities, fair visitors had the chance to see local handicrafts. The Indira women's association presented a display of scarves, hats, gloves and blankets, while its sister organisation, Jeta, displayed traditional Albanian dresses and home decorations. For those interested in potential trade opportunities, a product catalogue was available. 
Serbian cultural and historical heritage also figured in the fair materials. Among the sites highlighted was the Serbian Orthodox Patriarchate at Pec, built in the 12th century, and its flagship Decani Monastery. 
"The Patriarchate is one of the most important monuments of the late period in Europe. The four edifices of the site reflect the high points of the Byzantine-Romanesque ecclesiastical culture that developed in the Balkans between the 13th and 17th centuries," said the Rugova Experience Association. 
In addition to wooing tourists, the fair also provided a way for the local tourism industry to find out more about what prospective visitors may be seeking. Attendees had the option of filling out a feedback questionnaire and indicating which of the activities presented had peaked their interest. 
