26/08/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina --26/08/10 
The unofficial document declaring the independence of Serbs in northern Kosovo has provoked reactions from both Albanians and Serbs in the country. 
The declaration states that the Kosovo municipalities with Serb-majority populations "cannot be part of the state of Kosovo", Belgrade-based B92 reported. 
Serb-owned Kosovo Radio, Radio KiM, published excerpts from the document, called the "Declaration of Independence from the Alliance of the Municipalities of the Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija", on August 18th. The origin of the document is unclear, and it remains unsigned. 
 "[The document] seems to be politically-motivated. Members of such criminal structures, who have been working for years against the rule of law in northern Kosovo, know that their days are numbered," Memli Krasniqi, spokesman for Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci, told SETimes. 
 Belgrade seemed equally sceptical. "The Serbian government has a clearly defined policy on Kosovo and Metohija, well known to the Kosovo Serbs and it will not abandon that policy," Serbian Minister for Kosovo Goran Bogdanovic said. 
The ministry also warned Kosovo Serbs "not to fall for provocations by Pristina or the actions of irresponsible individuals from the Serb community, who represent their own interests". 
Serbia's Ministry for Kosovo condemned "the appearance of such a phantom declaration of independence", B92 reported. 
But Kosovo political analyst Besim Abazi says the document may have been a trial balloon, possibly incited by the Serb government -- which favours the division of Kosovo -- to gauge reactions within Serbia, Kosovo, and the international community. "Having no indentifiable author, it is a kind of a test of Pristina's reaction and the international presence, to open the way for different initiatives in that part of Kosovo," he told SETimes. 
Late last week, Kosovo Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi blamed former Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and his Democratic Party of Serbia. "This is a threat and a provocation and they expected us to react in an immature way. But we have monitored the situation closely and together with the international community we were ready to respond to any situation." 
