08/09/2005
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 09/08/05
Wrapping up a three-day visit to Kosovo on Wednesday (7 September), the UN special envoy for standards, Kai Eide, expressed optimism about the situation in the province, saying it was becoming more satisfactory and progress has been made. 
 "Some things have moved forward," Eide said. "I can say there has been progress between my first coming to Kosovo and now …. I am still not sure if the progress is 100 per cent, but this will be made clear when I examine all the facts and prepare my report for the UN Secretary General, Kofi Annan," Eide told journalists during a joint press conference in Pristina with Kosovo Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi. 
At the same time, the UN envoy stressed that much remains to be done. He called on the Kosovo Albanian leadership to step up efforts towards decentralisation, as well as to take effective steps to protect minority rights and enable the return of around 200,000 Serbs and other refugees. Also important is the protection of cultural heritage, including Serb Orthodox churches that have been past targets of vandalism, Eide said. 
Although the security situation has improved, it is still not good enough, the envoy said. "I understand that people do not feel safe," he added. 
 Eide's report on the progress of internationally set standards in Kosovo, expected in late September or early October, will form the basis for a UN decision on whether to launch negotiations on resolving Kosovo's final status. 
"The content of the report will be very long, but concrete and essential to be read by all the highest institutions. It will be a technical report, for technical issues and also would include political views for the politicians," Eide said. During the joint press conference, Kosumi urged him to prepare a "correct" report. 
 "I hope that the report is in the continuity of all the processes Kosovo has been through. This is an important evaluation of the processes that Kosovo had in the past and faces at present," Kosumi said. 
It was Eide's fourth visit to Kosovo since being named special envoy. On Thursday, he left for Belgrade, where he will meet with Serbia-Montenegro officials. Afterwards he travels to Brussels to talk with EU leaders, and then on to New York where he will discuss the situation with UN officials. 
