15/10/2004
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 15/09/04
More than three years ago, Croatia decided to computerise its healthcare system, especially in the area of primary care. The entire project -- including computerisation of outpatient clinics, hospitals and institutes -- was expected to cost around 66.3m euros. Croatia spends 1.8 billion euros on healthcare annually, and the investment in computerisation was seen as likely to result in significant savings over the long term. Implementation would take an estimated six months, with the entire system up and running within one year. 
"The cost of computerisation is minor in relation to the benefits," an official study concluded. "Computerisation of primary health care, where most of all the expenditures in healthcare originate, will give us a complete insight into the expenditure, at the moment of its creation, which will considerably lower higher-level costs at polyclinics and hospitals." 
Following the change of government in November 2003, however, nearly all healthcare projects initiated by the previous administration were suspended. The current health minister, Andrija Hebrang, says a review is needed of financial backing for the project. He has attacked his predecessor, Andro Vlahusic, for signing the computerisation contract just three days before leaving office. The government also says there are compatibility problems among existing computer resources in hospitals, primary care sites and the state health insurance bureau. 
Advocates of the computerisation project say the real reason is that the government neglected to earmark the necessary additional funding, even though it represents only a small part of the overall budget. The project should not have been halted, said Dr Ranko Stevanovic, a former health ministry official who now heads the Department of Primary Healthcare at the Croatian Institute of Public Health. 
Domestic engineering and computer science experts who examined the computerisation plans assessed them as "excellent", Stevanovic said. 
"Projects like this one should be excluded from party and all other political considerations. Over 40 experts from various domestic and international institutions took part in the project and it is impossible that all of them gathered around some party or political option," he said. 
"Besides this, there were also consultants from the World Bank and OSCE who evaluated the chosen solutions, while the best domestic experts in the area of computers, public healthcare institutions, health insurance, the medical association and faculty were engaged," Stevanovic added. 
