15/11/2010
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 15/11/10 
People in Kosovo were talking about the European Commission's progress report weeks before its official release on November 9th. A leaked version found its way into local media, and the government had already announced months ago that the report would be positive. 
In actuality, the EC had both good and bad news. It found that Kosovo has achieved significant progress in adopting anti-corruption legislation, but implementation remains very weak. On the economic front, the EC said the global financial crisis has had a comparatively small impact on Kosovo. But that's little comfort in a country with an unemployment rate of 45%. 
 Remittances, an important financial resource for many families, have been hurt by the global crisis. A weak educational system is still graduating more than 30,000 young people annually without the skills to succeed. The judicial system remains shaky. 
Concurring with an earlier Freedom House report, the EC also said more must be done to guarantee media freedom. 
 "If we read the report we see the language is more positive than last year and the progress of Kosovo is reflected there," says European Integration Minister Besim Beqaj. "The report concludes clearly that Kosovo has shown strong progress in decentralisation and co-operation with EULEX." 
Shpend Ahmeti, of the recently founded New Spirit party (FER), has a starkly different view. "The report shows that in Kosovo we don't see progress. It shows that the government has failed to address the challenges of the 2009 Progress Report." 
If the report includes more hopeful language, that's because the EC didn't want it to be used as a weapon in political campaigns, argues Muhamet Mustafa, of the Alliance New Kosovo (AKR). 
"We don't have sustainable progress," Mustafa said. "Two chapters are essential in this report, which were also mentioned last year, and these are economy and corruption, about which the report is very critical." 
"It's true that we see balanced language, but they tried not to allow the report to be abused during the elections," he added. 
Corruption is killing Kosovo, says Naim Rrustemi of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), noting that the issue is "mentioned 46 times" by the EC. 
The assessment from Brussels is the latest in a string of reports -- from Freedom House, the World Bank, and Transparency International -- which have pointed to serious problems in Europe's newest state. 
 "The report shows a real situation in Kosovo," Berat Maqastena, of the Kosovo World Policy Institute, tells SETimes. "The government would have liked a more positive report, but it should not serve as a tool in a political fight. Rather, it should be used for addressing the challenges and working to improve those areas which were criticised." 
 "We have to be realistic in addressing the challenges," Maqastena said, adding that the organised crime fight is hampered by a lack of control over northern Kosovo. The economy, he said, must be improved through investments. 
"Both the business community and government should work to improve legislation," he concluded. 
