09/03/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 09/03/05
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) could be declared "mine safe" in 2009, according to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Mine Action Centre (BHMAC), the government agency in charge of co-ordinating mine removal efforts in the country. The centre recently announced its mid-term plan for removing all landmines from critical areas over the next five years. 
"The end of implementation of the plan is linked to the Ottawa Mine Action Conference, which takes place every ten years," said BHMAC director Dusan Gavran. "The conference analyses all major actions against usage of land mines in the world. We came up with a plan that fits in with the global UN strategy. We presented it internationally at the Revision Conference in Nairobi last year. Our plan was recognised as an example of how the states have to prepare their mine action strategies until 2009." 
Following the end of the BiH conflict, several million landmines and unexploded ordnance remained in the country. Since 1996, there have been 1,522 victims of land mine incidents, including 439 fatalities. After nine years of mine removal efforts, approximately 2,000sq km are still marked as "suspicious areas". That amounts to 4 per cent of BiH territory. 
According to BHMAC data, approximately 100,000 people live in high-risk areas, and 600,000 in moderate-risk areas. Several foreign governments, including the US government, still officially warn their citizens that BiH is a dangerous place to travel because of land mines. 
Although world experts once called for totally clearing countries of mines, 100 per cent removal has proved impossible, Gavran said. Now the aim for most contaminated countries is to become "mine safe" -- meaning that people can move around without the fear of accidentally entering a mined area. 
The BHMAC plan categorises different areas in the country according to three levels of mine risk. Populated areas hold the top priority and must be cleared of mines. Agricultural areas are the second priority, and mines will be removed from some parts of these areas. Unpopulated areas -- the third category -- represent a low risk and will not be cleared. However, all uncleared areas, whether in the second or third category, will be clearly marked and enclosed by a wire fence. 
One potential problem with the strategy is that it depends on budgeting. Given its current 3m-euro annual budget, the BHMAC may not be able to afford the additional scouts and inspectors it needs. 
Nevertheless, Gavran remains optimistic. "We are hoping that by accomplishing this plan, no foreign government will consider BiH a dangerous country any more," he says. 
