27/09/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times -- 27/09/05
Earlier this month, Turkish President Ahmet Necdet Sezer invited Pope Benedict XVI to visit his secularist, overwhelmingly Muslim country in 2006. Foreign Ministry spokesman Namık Tan said the trip will allow Benedict to "personally see the climate of cultural tolerance in Turkey" and will "contribute to his efforts to enhance dialogue between religions and mutual understanding between civilisations globally". 
Most analysts, however, regarded the move as a way of handling a potentially thorny political situation. For reasons of diplomatic protocol, Sezer's invitation effectively rules out a planned earlier visit in November 2005. At the invitation of Patriarch Bartholomew I, the pope was to have attended Feast of Andrew's Day celebrations at Istanbul's Phanar -- the seat of the country's tiny Orthodox minority. 
That plan was a source of concern for Turkish leaders, who worried that Benedict might address Bartholomew as the ecumenical patriarch of the Orthodox Church -- a title Ankara does not recognise. Rather, the government views the patriarch as the spiritual leader only of the approximately 2,000 Orthodox Greeks in Turkey. 
Turkish leaders were also said to be worried that Benedict XVI would make religious freedom a keynote of his trip at a politically sensitive time. As the country prepares to embark on EU accession negotiations, slated to begin on 3 October, it is under strong pressure to show it is following through on pledges to strengthen religious freedom. That, however, requires changes that are controversial at home, and many analysts interpret Sezer's move as a bid to buy time. 
For more than 30 years the only Orthodox seminary in Turkey -- located on an island off Istanbul -- has been closed by authorities. Patriarch Bartholomew has received EU backing for his campaign to have it reopened. While Ankara has pledged to do so, it has not yet taken action. 
Finally, Ankara's relations with Benedict XVI have been cool from the start. The former Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger is on record as opposing EU membership for Turkey -- describing it as "a grave error … against the tide of history", and suggesting the country instead forge a league with other Muslim states. The pontiff's image in Turkey did not receive a boost from reports that he intended to pray in Haghia Sophia, an ancient Byzantine church in Istanbul that is now a museum. 
The Vatican is reportedly disappointed over Sezer's decision, though it has been publicly silent. As for Bartholomew, he struck a diplomatic tone in comments to reporters. "For us, it would have been a great gesture if the pope would have been able to join us to participate in our celebrations … but we do not want to insist nor do we want to create a crisis with the State. Our leaders have judged that it is better this way and we do not want to be obstinate," he remarked. 
The most recent visit by a Pope to Turkey was by John Paul II in 1979, as part of his effort to bring the Catholic and Orthodox churches closer together. 
