23/11/2012
By Anes Alic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 22/11/12
The leaders of the six most influential political parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) sealed a deal in Mostar on Tuesday (November 20th) ending the political deadlock that has gripped the country since the 2010 general elections. 
In a joint statement, the six pledged to ensure full institutional equality among the three main ethnic groups and minorities, thus resolving the demands of the 2009 European Court of Human Rights' ruling in the Sejdic-Finci case. 
"An agreement was reached about the most significant issues to work on the next two years, but most importantly to respect the principle -- by implementing the court's decision -- that members of one people can not vote for representatives of another," Dragan Covic, president of HDZ-BiH, said. 
The six leaders reaffirmed the previously agreed on joint obligations, including the key agreement between Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) leader Milorad Dodik and Social Democratic Party (SDP) leader Zlatko Lagumdzija two weeks earlier, which paved the way to Mostar. 
They also pledged to work to immediately reconstruct the executive branch in the Federation of BiH to ensure greater efficiency, while factoring in the parliamentary majority that their parties comprise there. 
The agreement was made possible in large part because the Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (SDA) was expelled from the ruling coalition on the state level. The SDA said the agreement will effectively dissolve the country and create a union of entities. 
"In order to save his post, Lagumdzija helped Dodik realise his political ideology, to weaken the state institutions and empower the entities," Amir Zukic, secretary general of the SDA, told SETimes. 
Many criticised the agreement as solidifying ethnic nationalism in the electoral process by ensuring individuals of one ethnic group can not vote for the candidate. Opposition Nasa Stranka (Our Party) said the agreement represents a solidification of ethnic territorial division through the weakening of the state institutions. 
"Insisting on the ethnic principle during elections and limiting citizens to vote only for their own ethnic group is against all democratic principles. The six parties' leaders clearly think the citizens can not vote as free-minded individuals, but only as members of ethnic collectives," Dennis Gratz, president of the Nasa Stranka, told SETimes. 
Critics also said the agreement will annul the jurisdiction of the BiH's High Judicial and Prosecutorial Council and sideline the Central Electoral Commission by reducing its jurisdiction. 
The agreement specified the entities' parliaments will appoint prosecutors on all levels of government, and the governments will propose candidates from a list determined by the council. 
"Nowhere in the region does the chief prosecutor elect his own deputies and other prosecutors. ... We are fighting for an independent judiciary, but it can not be achieved if the prosecutors are elected at party meetings," Nermin Pecanac, president of the opposition Social Democratic Union, told SETimes. 
The agreement also calls for ending electoral lists and abolishing the Centre for Vote Counting, which is run by the BiH's Central Election Commission; the latter's jurisdiction will be transferred to the entities. 
"The parties' deal will seal the fate of the Central Electoral Commission and cause it to collapse," Vedran Hadzovic, commission representative, told SETimes. This would mean no more electoral candidates, only party-based voting, which will enable the political parties, rather than individual elected officials, to own the mandates, he said. 
"There were never any objections to the work of the Centre for Vote Counting. On the other hand, the centre recently discovered several cases of attempts at falsifying electoral results," Hadzovic added. 
The party leaders also agreed to economic reforms to protect local producers and improve BiH's investment environment. BiH's two entities have different regulations governing the economy, making cross-entity trade difficult, but the Lagumdzija-Dodik said their agreement seeks to synchronise them. 
