23/06/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 23/06/05
Ten years ago, when a local bank launched Romania's first credit card, only one shop in Bucharest's downtown was able to accept electronic payments. Nowadays, there are about 6.2m credit and debit cards in Romanians' wallets and that number is climbing. 
According to statistics from the Romanian National Bank (BNR), about 1.2m new cards were issued during the past 12 months. Overall, the growth rate was about 25 per cent; it was higher in Bucharest, were it reached 40 per cent. Experts say if this pace continues, Romania could have 7m valid cards in circulation by the end of this year. 
The value of transactions has also grown: from 3.7 billion euros in 2003 to 5.3 billion euros in 2004. In the first quarter of 2005 alone, it totaled 2.1 billion euros. 
Banks expect credit cards, rather than debit cards, to show the most spectacular growth. Today they only represent about 5 per cent of the total number of cards in Romania, but this proportion could double by December, bank officials say. 
The boom has had side effects, including an expansion of ATM networks. There are now about 3,100 ATMs available all over Romania, compared to 2,165 two years ago. Businesses in the retail and service areas have been forced to invest in point of service (POS) machines, with more than 10,000 in operation by the fall of 2004. Although international giants Visa and MasterCard dominate the Romanian market, other companies are starting to issue their own cards. 
Online commercial transactions also are growing. Launched more than a year ago, the 3D Secure platform has already hosted $4m in transactions, making Romania a pioneer in Southeast Europe. Even though more than half were external deals attracted by the smaller fees, there is a considerable hope for the future. Some foresee a growth of up to 500 per cent by the end of the year for transactions originating in Romania. Others believe online transactions, which now represent less than 0.1 per cent of total electronic transactions, might reach 10 per cent to 15 per cent in three years. 
Yet some Romanians remain wary. "I like to receive my salary the old way, from our company's cashier. I simply don't trust the machines," explains Dumitru Purcelea, a 53-year-old electrician. "I feel better with cash in my pocket. If I go to the supermarket or to the restaurant and my card doesn't work, what would it be like," says Tina Manescu, a 26-year-old secretary. 
Such opinions have been buttressed by card related crimes, including the installation in a Bucharest neighbourhood of a fake cash machine, which read the information on users' cards. It's a sign that Romanian criminal groups who emptied the bank accounts of thousands of Westerners by cloning their cards have now turned their eyes to their own country. 
