17/05/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 17/05/13
As Croatia prepares to take its place in the EU, officials say they have purged voter registration rolls of more than 700,000 phantom voters and those who do not have permanent residences in the country as the government addresses the two-decade-old problem of establishing accurate voter lists. 
Experts and election watchdogs welcomed the progress and the state's effort, but noted there are still a lot of improperly unregistered voters on the lists for Croatia's local elections on Sunday (May 19th). 
According to the Adriatic Institute for Public Policy, a Croatian think tank, there were 917,323 non-existent voters on the list for the 2011 parliamentary elections. Officially, there were 4,092,323 voters in the country, but the Adriatic Institute said there were only 3,175,000 of legal voting age. 
"The authorities have to match the voter list with living individuals who are carrying Croatia's citizenship, and this should be relatively easy for a country which has just 4.2 million people," Natasa Srdoc, executive director of the Adriatic Institute, told SETimes. 
"A computerised system of casting one's vote would avoid any possible manipulation with paper ballots and would also resolve the problem of same individuals voting more than one time in the same elections. The system should also be monitored by independent observers from within Croatia and international observers. In that way, illegal, non-existent votes would not be able to tip the balance in favor of corrupt parties," she said. 
During the Croatian election in 2007, local newspaper Jutarnji List proved it was possible to vote twice in the same poll by sending a journalist to vote once over the border in Bosnia and Herzegovina and then again in Croatia. 
"Unrealistic number of voters has led to greater opportunities for manipulation, [which] we hope will end after offices of public records including voter registry are put in order," Dragan Zelic, director of the Zagreb-based NGO GONG, which deals with election monitoring, told SETimes. 
GONG and the state's electoral commission will monitor Sunday's elections, but there is no longer international election monitoring in Croatia. The Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe completed its mandate in Croatia in 2011. 
"The problem of the unrealistic number of voters stems from the so-called fictitious residence in Croatia, and these are people who really do not live in Croatia, but they have [a] residence. Another reason is diaspora where there are a number of deceased persons in the voter list. These are the main causes of the unrealistic number of voters, which is now finally starting to be solved," Zelic said. 
According to data from the public administration ministry, the number of voters registered for Sunday's elections is 3,758,638, a reduction of more than 700,000 from two years ago. In January 2012, the number eligible to vote in the referendum on joining the EU was 4,504,765. 
"Officers authorised to conduct voter registry are changing and updating the data about register of voters daily and continually. Administration is deleting those citizens who have lost the right to vote in death or termination of Croatian citizenship. We must note that the number of voters in late 2013 will be even more changed. Those citizens who have Croatian citizenship and did not report their place of permanent residence for one year will be deleted from the voters list," Suzana Grizelj, a ministry spokeswoman, told SETimes. 
The elections on Sunday will be the 16th held since Croatia declared independence in 1990 and the last elections before it joins EU as the 28th member state on July 1st. 
Srdoc said Croatia's 2011 parliamentary elections, presidential elections in 2009-10 and the 2012 EU referendum were decided on the basis of voter lists that included more than 1 million illegally registered voters. 
"Croatia's authorities are claiming that they have cleaned the list of non-existent voters, however, this has not been verified by independent groups and election experts from strong rule-of-law nations," Srdoc said. "I am afraid that Croatia's local elections will be decided through the same fraudulent electoral list. Croatia will continue to have illegitimate government, illegitimate parliament and the illegitimate president until new respective elections are held with an accurate voter list reflecting the true number of voters." 
Do you think Croatia is making progress in correcting its voter lists? Share your thoughts in the comments section. 
