29/07/2005
(FT, The Times, The Guardian, The Independent, The New York Times, International Herald Tribune - 29/07/05; AP, Reuters, AFP, BBC, RFE/RL, Radio B92 - 28/07/05)
The wife of fugitive war crimes suspect Radovan Karadzic appealed to her husband Thursday (28 July) to surrender to the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). She made the plea during an interview with Associated Press Television News, aired by TV stations across the region. 
"Between loyalty to you and to the children and grandchildren, I had to choose and I have chosen," Ljiljana said. "It is very painful for me to ask you and yet I do. I beg you with all my heart and soul to surrender. It will be a sacrifice for us, for the sake of your family." 
 "Our family is under constant pressure from all over. Our life and our existence is jeopardised," she added, speaking from the family's home in the town of Pale, 16km east of Sarajevo. 
The UN tribunal in The Hague indicted Karadzic 10 years ago, charging him with multiple counts of war crimes for his role in the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). He also faces two counts of genocide in connection with the 43-month siege of Sarajevo and the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys. 
Along with his former military commander, Ratko Mladic, and retired Croat General Ante Gotovina, Karadzic tops the ICTY's list of most wanted indictees. 
NATO troops have often raided the homes of members of the Karadzic family in search of clues that could lead to the fugitive's capture. A day before the commemoration of the 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre on 11 July, the couple's son, Aleksandar, was arrested and held for nearly 10 days on suspicion of providing support to his father. 
Karadzic is widely believed to be hiding in eastern BiH or in neighbouring Montenegro, having evaded arrest for more than eight years with the help of a network of supporters. The international community has imposed visa bans, asset freezes and other sanctions on members of his family and others believed to be helping him remain at large. 
 Ljiljana has admitted to having met her husband briefly in 2001, in a visit apparently organised at a secret location by his security guards. 
 "In the hope that you are alive and that you can make decisions by yourself, I'm begging you to make this decision," she said Thursday. "I'm now doing the only thing I can, I'm begging you." 
Both NATO and the EU have made it clear that full co-operation with the ICTY, including the arrest and hand over of war crimes indictees is a key condition BiH and Serbia-Montenegro must meet to be able to join Euro-Atlantic structures. Karadzic is among nine Serb and Bosnian Serb indictees still sought by The Hague court. 
"We can only welcome these comments," the AFP quoted NATO spokesman Derek Chappell as saying in response to the plea by Karadzic's wife. "Our position is that Karadzic and Mladic hold the entire region hostage. Any additional pressure on them to surrender is welcomed." 
"We would welcome his surrender to The Hague," EUFOR spokeswoman Bridget Rose remarked. "We support her appeal. It would be most honourable for him to do so." 
