21/02/2006
(Reuters, Independent, The Scotsman, BBC, UPI - 21/02/06; AFP, AP, Reuters, BBC, RFE/RL, International Herald Tribune, Sofia News Agency, FENA, HINA - 20/02/06)
Officials in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) said on Monday (20 February) that samples taken from four dead swans found in the central parts of the country have tested positive for bird flu. Further tests will be conducted at the EU reference laboratory in Weybridge, Britain, to determine whether the birds had the deadly H5N1 form of the virus. 
The head of the Sarajevo Veterinary Laboratory, Abdulah Gagic, said authorities had taken all precautionary measures. 
"I want to emphasise that from the expert's point of view, there is still no need for panic," said Gagic. "I think that all the measures that are being taken by state and local offices in the field will be sufficient and that the disease will be localised to the area where it was discovered." 
The dead swans were found Friday at Lake Plivsko near Jajce. Fearing that they could be infected with the H5 virus, authorities shot dead the rest of the birds in the flock, disinfected the area and set up a surrounding 3km protection zone. The country has also reportedly ordered that nearly 4,500 domestic birds be culled. 
If tests at the British laboratory confirm the presence of the H5N1 strain in the birds, it would be BiH's first case of the highly pathogenic form of the virus, which has spread to three continents in recent weeks. 
Meanwhile, about ten days after announcing its first case of H5N1, Bulgaria said on Monday that three more wild swans, found in different locations, had also tested positive for the deadly form of the virus. 
Bulgarian veterinary authorities said that 10km surveillance zones had been established around the locations in eastern Bulgaria where the infected birds were found. Traffic has also been restricted and experts are performing daily checks on poultry in these areas, the AP reported. Additional precautionary measures include disinfection of vehicles and shoes at the entrance of poultry farms. 
In neighbouring Croatia, Agriculture Minister Petar Cobankovic confirmed on Monday that the H5 virus of the avian influenza was detected in a dead swan discovered at Ciovo Island near Split last week. A probe has since confirmed that the virus was the H5N1 strain. 
Within the EU, France -- Europe's biggest poultry producer -- has become the seventh member nation to report the presence of the H5N1 virus on its territory. Other EU members already affected by bird flu are Austria, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy and Slovenia. 
While H5N1 has been detected in chickens in more than 30 villages in Romania and in parts of Ukraine, the outbreaks in Bulgaria and in the seven EU member nations affected thus far have only hit wild birds such as swans and ducks. 
The virus is still considered difficult to transmit between humans, but scientists fear that it could mutate and spark a worldwide pandemic. 
The lethal H5N1 strain has killed at least 90 people since early 2003, including four in Turkey in January, less than three months after the first outbreak of the disease in the country. 
EU veterinary experts are discussing on Tuesday whether the Union should allow Europe-wide vaccinations of commercial poultry stocks to counter the further spread of bird flu. Opinions appeared split before the meeting, with some officials voicing concern about the effectiveness, cost and logistical difficulties of the proposed measure, which requires the endorsement of the EU. 
