26/07/2005
(News.com.au, People's Daily - 26/07/05; Washington File, Cyprus News Agency - 25/07/05)
The United States and Cyprus have concluded a reciprocal shipboarding agreement that will facilitate co-operation between the two countries in the prevention of the transfer of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) by sea. The accord, signed by US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Cypriot Foreign Minister George Iakovou in Washington on Monday (25 July), is part of the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI). 
 The PSI, announced by US President George W. Bush on 31 May 2003, is a global initiative that aims to stop shipments of WMD, their delivery systems and related materials to and from states and non-state actors of proliferation concern. It is part of an overall counterproliferation effort, intended to apply intelligence, diplomatic, law enforcement and other tools towards the achievement of that goal. UN Security Council Resolution 1540 urges all states to take co-operative action to prevent the trafficking of WMD. The shipboarding agreement is one of the various concrete steps countries can take to establish the basis for their participation in the PSI. 
Cyprus is the first EU member state, and the fifth country in the world, to sign a shipboarding agreement with the United States. Liberia, Panama, the Marshall Islands and Croatia have all signed agreements with the United States. Cyprus is the world's sixth largest ship registry, measured by gross tonnage of registered ships, making the accord all the more important. 
"The combination of states, with which we have boarding agreements and Proliferation Security Initiative partner commitments, means that more than 60 per cent of the global commercial shipping fleet dead-weight tonnage is now subject to rapid action consent procedures for boarding, search and seizure," the US State Department said. 
The deal allows either country to ask the other to confirm the nationality of a US- or Cypriot-flagged ship suspected of carrying WMD-related cargo. It gives the other permission to board, search, and -- if needed -- detain the vessel in question and its cargo. The agreement does not apply to third-party vessels. 
"Signing the shipboarding agreement demonstrates the commitment of Cyprus and the United States to ensuring the highest standards of security for their flag registries," the State Department said. Monday's agreement, it added, also sends a clear message to proliferators that neither of the two countries "will tolerate the involvement of their vessels in the trade of proliferation-related cargoes". 
The ship-boarding agreements under the PSI, according to the State Department, serve two purposes. They "simultaneously deter proliferators and attract legitimate commercial shipping interests that want to ensure their goods are transported under a reputable and responsible flag, which is not 'misused' to transport illicit proliferation-related shipments". 
