10/02/2010
 (Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg, Reuters, AFP, DPA, EurActiv, Euobserver, Euronews - 10/02/10; AP, AFP, Reuters, FT, BBC, ANA-MPA - 10/02/10)
Germany and others in the 16-nation eurozone have agreed in principle to help Greece with its deepening fiscal crisis, media reported Tuesday (February 9th). The decision aims to prevent economic failure from moving to other nations in the currency group and eroding confidence in the euro. 
"We are talking about support in the broad sense," the EU's new Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn told Bloomberg news agency. 
The assistance would likely come in the form of bilateral loans and guarantees, unnamed officials said, noting that no concrete plans have been made yet. The talks on what could become the first bailout of a eurozone member in the currency's 11-year history are reportedly led by Germany, which has decided to "take a significant steps" to tackle the crisis. 
"We are thinking about what we should do if the crisis spills from Greece into other euro countries," agencies quoted a German government officials as telling British daily Financial Times. "It's more about finding firewalls, containing the problem, than principally about helping the Greeks." 
 Reports about a possible European rescue plan for Greece came ahead of an informal EU economic summit in Brussels this Thursday. The original plans were for the meeting to focus on a long-term growth strategy for the 27-nation bloc. 
Observers believe however that the Greek crisis -- blamed for the recent sharp decline in the euro and pressure on bond prices -- is likely to dominate the talks in Brussels. The meetings will reportedly be attended also by European Central Bank (ECB) President Jean-Claude Trichet. 
European officials have voiced strong opposition against getting the IMF involved in the case, prompting fears of a possible Greek sovereign default. There is also speculation that the Balkan country could become the first member to be forced out of the euro club. 
"What's clear is that this is a matter for the Europeans," German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schaeuble said this week. "There is no doubt that Greece is not a question for the International Monetary Fund." 
Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou's Socialist government, which came to power following the October snap elections, is under strong pressure to cut the country's huge public debt and budget deficit. 
Authorities in Athens revealed that the 2009 budget gap, which was to stand at 3.7% of GDP, according to a forecast last spring, would actually widen to 12.7% of GDP, more than four times the 3% limit for the countries in the eurozone. 
 Last month, the Greek government presented a four-year austerity plan, committing to bring the budget deficit to below the 3% of GDP ceiling and prevent a debt crisis. 
 Hours before the start of a 24-hour national strike against public sector wage freezes and bonus cuts at midnight Tuesday, Papandreou's cabinet announced further tough measures, including an increase in the average age of retirement by two years to 63 by 2015 and new taxes. 
Papandreou said his team would focus on three goals: reducing the public debt, promoting growth and accelerating legislative and institutional measures. 
Wednesday's strike, which has paralysed the country, is considered the first major test of the government's resolve to deal with the fiscal crisis, the media noted. 
