31/03/2009
(Euobserver, EurActiv - 30/03/09; DPA - 29/03/09; AFP, Reuters, Euronews, B92, MIA, Czech EU Presidency - 28/03/09)
The EU foreign ministers met in Hluboka Nad Vltavou in the Czech Republic on Saturday (March 28th) and reassured the seven Western Balkan countries about their prospects to join the Union. 
"The Western Balkans' European perspectives … remain essential for the stability, reconciliation and the future" of the region, the ministers said. 
They also noted the established Stabilisation and Association Process remains the main framework for the Western Balkan countries' EU accession and urged them to continue the political and economic reforms that would lead to EU integration. 
"Each country's progress towards the EU must be based on individual merit and rigorous conditionality," the statement said. 
It also called for "solidarity and close co-operation between the EU, international financial institutions and the Western Balkan countries" during the global economic crises. 
In addition, the statement called for establishing a visa-free regime once the Western Balkan countries meet the benchmarks defined in their individual road maps. 
Of the seven countries, Croatia is farthest along in the accession process. However, it must solve its border dispute with Slovenia, which has blocked the opening of a number of new negotiating chapters. Macedonia is the only other country to gain official candidate status but still lacks a date to launch accession talks. 
The other five countries -- Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo, Montenegro and Serbia -- are in different phases of the accession process. 
Several EU states, notably heavyweights France and Germany, have recently called for a pause in the enlargement process until the Union resolves the institutional crisis from Ireland's rejection of the Lisbon Treaty last year. 
"Clearly, there will be no enlargement if there is no Lisbon Treaty," French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner said after the meeting, reiterating the stance of German Chancellor Angela Merkel. 
However, EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana and Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn insisted the enlargement process must continue. The region had yet to see an "end of history" or "eternal peace", Rehn said after the meeting in Hluboka. 
Swedish Foreign Minister Carl Bildt, whose country takes over the six-month rotating EU presidency from the Czech Republic on July 1st, warned that shutting the bloc's door to the Western Balkan countries "would have devasting consequences for the region". 
