24/04/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 24/04/07
The strongest Croatian opposition party, the Social Democratic Party (SDP), will hold an extraordinary party convention on June 2nd with a single task, to elect a new leader. Parliamentary elections are scheduled for November and the new party chief will face a difficult task ahead. 
Ivica Racan, a former prime minister and SDP leader, is fighting for his life. He is in critical condition, now that cancer has spread to the brain. 
Just a day before slipping into a coma, Racan, 63, publicly resigned as SDP head. In an open letter to the public, he said he "needed to focus on his battle for life". 
Racan is considered the symbol of Croatian social democracy, having led the SDP for 17 years. "Now you will have to continue your work without me," he said to party members in the letter many view as his political testament. 
Tonino Picula, a former foreign affairs minister and close colleague, said Racan had written it by hand, despite terrible pain. In the text, Racan called for unity among the SDP members. He reminded them of the social democratic values they must implement in society, urging them to remain determined and continue with their good work. 
Now the SDP is poised to enter a new chapter, one without Racan as a strong and decisive leader, competition within the party is beginning to emerge. 
The main question is whether the new leader will also be a candidate for prime minister in the November elections, or whether the two posts will be filled by two different people. 
If the party chief does not plan to run for prime minister, then SDP Vice President Zeljka Antunovic is the strongest candidate. She enjoys strong support from members, but is not popular with the general public. 
For this reason, younger party members -- such as Zoran Milanovic and financial expert Ljubo Jurcic -- are coming forward. Despite their lack of support within the party, they hope to strike a chord with voters. 
The state of the SDP in the post-Racan era is not yet clear. It will become more so, however, at the upcoming party convention, which will aim to set the party back on track now that it's longtime leader has left the arena. 
