23/05/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 23/05/13
With a little more than a month until Croatia joins the EU, the country has increased its border security efforts. 
In preparation for EU entry, Croatia has almost tripled the number of border police to around 6,000. They will patrol the country's 1,400 kilometre-long border with non-EU neighbours Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
"It is hard to talk about statistics and the actual number of these crimes, but what we can say is that Croatia has made much in recent years to combat human trafficking. A series of laws, reorganised police work, co-operation with neighboring countries has increased. Of course, combat against human trafficking can always be better and more can always be done," Mario Mazic, director of Youth Initiative for Human Rights, a regional NGO based in Zagreb, told SETimes. 
Last week, police arrested 25 people who were accused of trafficking immigrants into the EU. The group allegedly smuggled 133 people, mainly from Kosovo and Turkey, into the EU. 
The arrests took place on May 14th in Zagreb, Split and the northern town of Osijek. 
"In search of the apartments of the arrested, police seized ... money, cell phones, documents, drugs, SIM cards. Transportation of the immigrants was performed by cars, boats and public transport, with the help of a guide. Immigrants paid between 1,000 and 1,200 euros each for the trip, [and ended] up in Slovenia or Italy," Helena Biocic, interior spokesman, told SETimes. 
"This is a message to the smugglers. Rest assured we'll come knocking on your door," Dean Savic, head of the Croatian police unit for corruption and organized crime, said. 
BiH authorities arrested 13 persons in the same action. 
"Police officers of the border police of BiH ... carried out an action codenamed 'South' along with colleagues from Croatia. During the action, 13 people were arrested and they're suspected of smuggling illegal immigrants from Kosovo and Turkey. The operation was conducted in 14 cities and the arrested were handed over to the prosecution," Sanela Dujkovic, a BiH border police spokesman, told SETimes. 
The Balkan route is a smuggling route is used to ferry humans, drugs and weapons from Eastern Europe, Africa and the Middle East to western Europe. According to the International Organisation for Migration, an estimated 400,000 people illegally enter EU member countries every year. 
Ruza Tomasic, vice president of the Parliamentary Committee for Human Rights, said that Croatia has done a lot when it comes to human trafficking, but needs to "stay awake." 
"Co-operation between countries of the region is crucial. We must forget the differences, whether political or ethnic, religious, if we want truly to cope with this type of crime. This also applies to other forms of crime, such as trafficking in drugs, weapons," Tomasic told SETimes. 
How will Croatia change when it enters the EU? Let us know what you think in the comment section below. 
