22/06/2006
(AP, DPA, BBC, RFE/RL, Makfax, The White House, Washington File - 21/06/06; Official Austrian EU Presidency Web Site)
The EU plays an "essential" role in helping strengthen democracy in the Balkans, US President George W. Bush said Wednesday (21 June), pledging Washington's support for efforts to achieve that goal. 
The US leader's statement came during a joint press conference with Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schuessel -- whose country currently holds the rotating EU presidency -- and European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso, at the end of a US-EU summit in Vienna. 
"We talked about the Balkans, and I assured the chancellor that Austria's role in the Balkans and the EU's role in the Balkans is essential and we look forward to supporting your role," said Bush. "We want to be a participant in helping bring peace to that region." 
Schuessel said the EU briefed Bush about the bloc's strategy for the Balkans, with some "open questions" discussed in detail. 
A summit progress report released by the White House on Wednesday cited common efforts to support the status process in Kosovo, promote constitutional and police reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina, strengthen democracy in Serbia-Montenegro and help Montenegro prepare for its independence referendum. 
The United States and the EU also share a common position that full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia is a key condition for the Western Balkan countries' integration into European and Euro-Atlantic structures, the report said. 
A declaration at the end of the summit noted that next year would be a "crucial period" for the Western Balkans and pledged continued efforts to help stabilise the countries in the region, support their European and Euro-Atlantic perspectives and help them fight organised crime and corruption. 
"We will continue to work with NATO as well as the OSCE to ensure the security and prosperity of the region," the declaration read. "On Kosovo in particular, we will continue to ensure the convergence of our positions on the ongoing talks in order to promote a lasting status that respects the Contact Group principles. We will develop our relations with Montenegro as a sovereign, independent state and call on both Serbia and Montenegro to pursue a direct and constructive dialogue on their future relations." 
Consensus was also reached on other issues of common concern for the EU and the United States, such as the deepening nuclear crises with North Korea and Iran. 
