15/03/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 15/03/05
The First Southeast Europe Summit for Development of Co-operation was held in Skopje on 10 March and 11 March under the auspices of Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. Around 150 heads of state, ministers and members of the business community from the Southeast Europe (SEE) region shared views. 
In their final declaration, participants agreed that boosting regional co-operation is key to further progress along the road to EU membership. They called for the complete functioning of democracy and equal rights for all individuals. In addition, the summit statement read that countries must provide an attractive climate for foreign investment, ensure a $5,000 minimum per capita investment for infrastructure in the region, and support projects needed to integrate the region with other parts of Europe. 
"Integration of the region is our joint goal," Crvenkovski said. "After a period of political tensions, armed conflict and hostilities, the priority of the region can finally be said to be economic development and improvement of lifestyle." 
"This conference is sending a clear message that the SEE countries are prepared for regional co-operation, which gives the EU the right to continue to strongly support that process," said EU Commission Enlargement Director Fabrizio Barbaso, who attended the summit on behalf of Rehn. He emphasised that the accession of Western Balkan countries would be a long process, but one which the EU would support financially. 
For his part, former Italian Prime Minister Guiliano Amato recalled the conflicts of the 1990s, which kept the Western Balkans mired in isolation. "Today, ten years after Dayton, everything is different. It would be bad for you not to join the EU but it would be Europe's great setback if we do not take you with us." 
Sharik Tara, founder of the North and South Europe Economic Forum, spoke of the necessity for infrastructure development in the region. “Three and a half billion dollars are necessary for the infrastructure in Macedonia alone, money the country cannot provide by itself. Therefore, international institutions should assist it through donations, credit lines and funds," Tara said. 
Former European Commission (EC) President Jacques Santer pointed to Macedonia's successful involvement in the stabilisation and association process. "I hope the EC will soon give its avis for the answers to the Questionnaire, and until then the only thing the country has to do is to continue to stride along the way of full integration in the EU," Santer said at the conference. 
According to Institute of European Affairs Chairman Jurgen Gramke, cross-border co-operation is the most important factor for attracting direct foreign investment and economic development. SEE countries can benefit from the experience of EU countries that have already completed the process of overhauling their economies and improving ties with their neighbours, Gramke said. 
