20/05/2009
(Euobserver - 20/05/09; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, BBC, UPI, AKI, NYT, Newsweek, Euronews, VOA, RFE/RL, Fena, B92, US Embassy in BiH - 19/05/09; The White House - 18/05/09)
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) faces the risk of a return to violence, unless the country's leaders stop playing on ethnic tensions, US Vice President Joe Biden said on Tuesday (May 19th) in Sarajevo, the first stop of his three-day trip to the Balkans. 
"Today, we are worried about the direction your country, your future, and your children's future are taking," he said in an address to BiH's ethnically mixed parliament. 
The 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement ended three and a half years of bloodshed. But, the past three years have seen a rise in nationalist rhetoric, used by leaders of the country's three main ethnic communities as part of their wrangling over numerous issues. 
"When will you tire of that rhetoric?" Biden said. "This must stop!" Instead of making inflammatory statements, politicians should focus on the reforms that will allow the country to make progress on its path to Euro-Atlantic integration, he contended. 
Nationalistic politics and quarrels among the country's politicians have affected progress in terms of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement it signed with the EU in June 2008. 
"You can follow this path to Europe, or you can take an alternative path. ... At best, you'll remain among the poorest countries in Europe. At worst, you'll descend into ethnic chaos," warned Biden. 
He also urged BiH's politicians to agree on constitutional reforms to secure a better future for the country through its Euro-Atlantic integration. 
The Dayton Accords established BiH as a state of two semi-autonomous entities -- the Bosnian Serb-run Republika Srpska (RS) and the Bosniak- and Croat-dominated Federation of BiH -- bound by weak central institutions. 
Bosnian Serb politicians have been threatening to push for RS's secession, while some Bosniak leaders have been calling for the entity's abolition. 
"Making the right choice means that the leaders of this country must stop the pursuit of narrow ethnic and political interests," Biden said. 
He also expressed Washington's commitment to helping BiH make headway along its accession path. 
"The [EU] door is open for the countries of this region for the first time in history to be an integral part of a free Europe," Biden said. "The US will help you walk through that door." 
Accompanying Biden in his meetings with BiH's tripartite presidency and other top officials in Sarajevo were EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana and High Representative and EU Special Representative Valentin Inzko. 
The highest-level US official to visit BiH since President Bill Clinton in 1999, Biden will travel to Pristina after his visit to Belgrade on Wednesday. 
