06/12/2010
(AP, Deutsche Welle, Kathimerini, Athens News, ANA - 06/12/10; AFP, DPA, Reuters, UK Press Association, The New York Times, Bloomberg, Radio Netherlands, Telegraph, ANA, Greek Reporter - 05/12/10)
Greek authorities said on Sunday (December 5th) that six individuals arrested as part of a police operation the previous day have been formally charged with belonging to a terrorist organisation and possession of arms and explosive materials. 
The suspects, aged between 21 and 31, were detained during co-ordinated raids in Athens, the port of Piraeus, the western town of Agrinio and the southern Mediterranean island of Crete, Greek police chief Lefteris Oikonomou told reporters. 
The authorities also indicated that Saturday's detentions helped foil a new terrorist attack, but would not provide any details about the timing or possible target of the planned assault. 
 "There were serious indications that a new terrorist attack was being planned, so we moved quickly to arrest these people," UPI quoted police spokesman Thanassis Kokkalakis as saying. 
 Two of the suspects -- Alexandros Mitrousias, 21, and George Karayiannidis, 30 -- are believed to be members of a group calling itself the Conspiracy of the Cells of Fire. The organisation has claimed responsibility for a series of parcel bombs sent to embassies in Athens and several European leaders last month. 
The other four were identified as Christos Politis, 31, Constantine Sakkas, Styliani Antoniou and Dimitrios Michail, all aged 26. 
Sakkas and Mitrousias were the first to be apprehended during a raid on a safehouse in the Athens district of Nea Smyrni. 
Antoniou, the only woman among the six, and Politis were arrested in two other districts in the Greek capital, while Karayiannidis was detained following a raid at a safehouse in Piraeus and Michail was held in Sitia, Crete. 
Media reports quoted a police source as saying that a flat near the town of Agrinio served as another hideout. According to state television NET, it had apparently been used as a transfer point for weapons smuggled from Albania. 
Police said the explosives and weapons seized by the country's counter-terrorism division during Saturday's operation included 50kg of industrial-grade ANFO, 200 grams of TNT, eight handguns, four Kalashnikov assault rifles, three sub-machine guns, four hand grenades and a large cache of ammunition of various calibres. They also confiscated an unspecified "big number of laptops and desktops", three pairs of car license plates, a bullet-proof vest, wigs, full face hoods and cellular phones. Officials say Karayiannidis had a forged police identity card on him. 
According to reports, police initially suspected that the weapons belonged to a far-left extremist group, Revolutionary Sect, believed to be responsible for the murders of an anti-terrorist police officer and investigative journalist Sokratis Giolas. The group emerged after the riots following the death of teenager Alexis Grigoropoulos, who was killed by police in December 2008. Revolutionary Sect gunned down Giolas in front of his pregnant wife in Athens in July. 
The Conspiracy of the Cells of Fire was initially involved in arson attacks before turning to bombings in 2009. 
Early ballistic tests have however failed to link the seized weapons to previous terrorist attacks. 
"Tests conducted until now on the weapons found around Athens have not been matched to terrorist activity," the police said in a statement. "The investigation continues to determine possible links to other punishable acts." 
The weekend raids came ahead of several rallies planned for Monday to mark the second anniversary of Grigoropoulos's killing. According to the AP, police have closed roads and have deployed several thousand officers around Athens. 
