04/06/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 04/06/07
A deadly suicide bombing in Ankara last month that resulted in six deaths and almost 100 injuries has intensified the debate over whether to launch a cross-border operation into northern Iraq, where the terrorist Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) -- the main group suspected of carrying out the May 22nd bombing -- is based. 
 Turkish Armed Forces Commander General Yasar Buyukanit recently told reporters that such an operation is necessary to counter increasing terror attacks by the PKK, but he also said the army needs the approval of the civilian authority. 
With only a few weeks to go before the July 22nd early parliamentary elections, Buyukanit's remarks sparked increased public pressure on the government. In a TV interview on May 24th, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said his administration was prepared to allow the military into northern Iraq if such a request was made. 
In response, however, Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister Barham Salih said that Turkey and Iraq need to use diplomatic means to resolve the issue -- and that Iraq would not accept a breach of its sovereignty. 
According to Turkish press reports, Turkey has sent additional military forces to its border with Iraq, and recently F-16 fighter jets started their flights over the zero point at the border. 
Gul: No immediate plans  
"Turkey has run out of patience over the safe haven the terrorist PKK enjoys in neighbouring northern Iraq," Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul said after three more attacks that followed the suicide bombing in Ankara. Seven Turkish soldiers were killed in a roadside bomb attack in the southern city of Sirnak, a mine planted by the PKK targeted the convoy of a senior police official in Tunceli province; and a separate attack in eastern Turkey derailed a freight train. 
Gul said that Turkey would launch a cross-border operation if this is deemed necessary, though he added that no plans have yet been devised for such an action. He asked for stronger support from the United States in eliminating the PKK threat. But if Turkey does decide to act, he said, it will not seek approval from Washington. 
Following these remarks, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and Gul spoke about the issue in a telephone conversation, according to diplomatic sources. Rice emphasised that the United States stands by Turkey in its fight against terrorism, and promised stronger support. 
Washington has long warned Ankara against a cross-border operation in northern Iraq and has urged co-operation with Baghdad and the Iraqi Kurdish regional government against the PKK. US officials worry that such an operation could destabilise a relatively peaceful region in Iraq as well as fuel conflict between Turkey and the Iraqi Kurds, who are a staunch US ally. 
But Ankara says the Iraqi Kurds, who run an autonomous administration in northern Iraq, tolerate -- and even assist -- thousands of PKK militants. Turkey is also concerned that Iraqi Kurdish efforts to incorporate the oil center of Kirkuk into their self-governing region could embolden the PKK. 
"Government fears risks"  
Many analysts and journalists believe the talk among politicians about a possible military operation amounts to little more than pre-election rhetoric. "The prime minister says they will allow the military into northern Iraq if the military makes such a request.The chief commander said already a month ago that such an operation is necessary," Turkish writer and columnist Mete Belovacikli said 
 In reality, he adds, the government is unwilling to launch such an action, due to the many risks it could bring – both in terms of domestic politics and foreign policy. "But they are under increasing public pressure, and are now throwing the ball into the military's court," he said. 
 According to Ilnur Cevik, editor-in-chief of The New Anatolian, it is questionable whether a cross-border operation could succeed. "A military operation against terrorist hideouts in a rugged place like the Kandil Mountains in northern Iraq would never be successful without the element of surprise. The PKK would move out of the area and disperse into small groups which would never be caught," he said. 
Turkey staged several incursions into northern Iraq in the early 1990s, with as many as 50,000 troops. Each time, the militants made a comeback after most of the Turkish soldiers withdrew. 
Cevik also notes that a military operation before the general elections would increase support for the ruling Justice and Development Party, and the. The secularist military -- which suspects the party of seeking to impose a religious agenda on Turkey -- doesn't want to give it that advantage. 
The PKK's new tactics? 
 Last month's suicide bombing in Ankara has also sparked a debate among analysts over whether the PKK threat is entering a more intense phase, with the group adopting new tactics such as suicide attacks. 
Although the group, considered a terrorist organisation by the US and the EU, denied involvement in the May 22nd suicide bombing, most officials and analysts are convinced it was behind the attack. The PKK has a track record of denying involment, leaving other terrorist groups linked to the organisation to shoulder the responsibility. 
The PKK itself is not a monolithic group, analysts say. Some units operating under the name favour more violent tactics. 
"In the past two months, at least 30 PKK militants, who were planning to carry out suicide attacks, were captured. The security reports show that the PKK has tried to provide significant amount of C-4 and A-4 plastic explosives to its militants in the big cities, for major attacks," says Ihsan Bal, an anti-terrorism expert at the Ankara based think tank International Strategic Research Organisation. 
However, the PKK leadership now wants to disassociate itself from the May suicide bombing because of the worldwide revulsion it generated, Bal suggests. 
 Nihat Ali Ozcan, an expert on the group, says it is learning from the experiences of other terrorist organisations around the world. 
"The PKK is trying to import to Turkey methods used by the terrorists in Iraq, such as roadside bombings and suicide bombings. With the collapse of the Iraqi Army and the chaotic situation in the country, tonnes of explosives have been without control. A significant number of these explosives have been acquired by organisations throughout Middle East, and the PKK is one of these organisations," Ozcan said. 
Both analysts say new attacks are probable. But international solidarity with Turkey and widespread condemnation of violent attacks could force the PKK to reconsider. 
"What terrorists want to see is Turkey more isolated and polarised, in a state of fear and panic. But if this strong solidarity and unity against terrorism continues, their plans are turning up blank," Bal said. 
The PKK has fought for an independent country since 1984, causing more than 37,000 deaths in the process. After the capture of the group's leader, Abdullah Ocalan, in 1999, the militants began shifting its bases to areas outside Turkey, and mainly in northern Iraq. The Turkish military says up to 3,800 militants are currently based just across the border, and that up to 2,300 operate inside Turkey. 
