11/08/2008
(FT, Deutsche Welle - 30/05/08; AP, Reuters, Makfax, UN News Centre, UN Office on Drugs and Crime - 29/05/08)
A recent, sharp decline in crime across the Balkans has turned the region into one of the safest in Europe, the UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) said in a report released earlier this summer. 
The rates of crimes against people, such as murder, rape and assault, as well as of property crimes, such as robbery and burglary, are now lower in the Balkan countries than in Western Europe, says the UNODC in the May 29th report. 
"Surprising as it may be, the Balkan region is one of the safest in Europe," UNODC Executive Director Antonio Maria Costa wrote in the preface. 
The positive developments reportedly stem from the greater political stability and democratisation that followed the initially chaotic breakup of Yugoslavia. International assistance, particularly from the EU, facilitated the region's postwar recovery, while the process of building closer ties with the Union opened borders and reduced the allure of smuggling. 
"The Balkans is departing from an era when demagogues, secret police and thugs profited from sanctions busting and the smuggling of people, arms, cigarettes and drugs," the report said. 
According to the UNODC, residents of the region are now as safe as, or safer than, those living almost anywhere else. 
"The vicious circle of political instability leading to crime, and vice versa, that plagued the Balkans in the 1990s, has been broken," Costa said in Brussels. 
Organised crime is also receding as a major threat, according to the UNODC. Drug trafficking is on the decline. Arms smuggling and human trafficking are also purportedly fading. 
But "enduring links [among] business, politics and organised crime" remain a serious challenge for the region, warned Costa. 
"Profiteers of the past are trying to launder their reputations and money through business and politics," he said. 
The report cited Albania as the country with the highest incidence of bribery (66% of respondents paid a bribe in 2006) among 57 nations surveyed, well above the 9% average for the region. Costa warned that corruption is "public enemy number one" in the Balkans. 
