12/12/2005
(George C. Marshall European Centre for Security Studies -- 12/12/05) 
Organised crime, trafficking and similar activities pose a serious threat to democracy, said US Ambassador to Macedonia Gillian Milovanovic at the opening of the Regional Co-operation in Combating Illicit Trafficking conference in Skopje, Macedonia on 7 December. 
The three-day conference, a joint venture between the George C. Marshall European Centre for Security Studies and Macedonia's Foreign Ministry, drew more than 70 leaders from more than a dozen nations and international organisations. 
The conference reviewed national measures -- education, training, equipment -- and policies to increase co-operation on trafficking within nations. Participants then considered ways to enhance joint and combined activities in support of the international community's fight against illicit trafficking. Finally, and most importantly, the conference aimed to strengthen regional co-operation within the framework of the Adriatic Charter. 
Addressing the issue of trafficking and economic development, Milovanovic said, "The very freedoms that characterise democracy and free markets can be and are being exploited by criminals. There is evidence that transnational crime, corruption and violence are on the increase. And it is equally clear that trafficking undermines regional security, stability and economic development." 
Worldwide, an estimated 600,000 and 800,000 people are trafficked across international borders every year, Milovanovic noted. 
"Victims of trafficking are forced into prostitution, hard labour, child soldiering and other forms of involuntary servitude -- a fancy name for slavery. Ending human trafficking is a very high priority for the United States. Our government, law enforcement agencies and citizen organisations are taking serious and concrete steps to prevent trafficking, protect victims and prosecute those who engage in trafficking," she said. 
US efforts have contributed to the prosecution of nearly 8,000 perpetrators of trafficking crimes, Milovanovic said. "These 8,000 prosecutions have resulted in more than 3,000 convictions around the world. Last year alone, 39 countries enacted new anti-trafficking laws, and 32 additional countries are in the process of drafting or passing new anti-trafficking legislation," she said. 
Such demonstrated national commitment to combating trafficking is also directly relevant to "any country's aspirations for integration with Euro-Atlantic institutions, among them the EU and NATO," she added. 
Because trafficking is transnational, it must be defeated by working jointly with other governments and international organisations. The conference stressed that combating this scourge requires strong political leadership, clear national action plans, appropriate legislation, sufficient national resources, training of law enforcement and military personnel, efficient criminal justice systems and programmes to protect victims and witnesses. 
