21/04/2006
(AP, HINA, FENA - 20/04/06)
The leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croatia agreed on Thursday (20 April) that the role of a special council on bilateral co-operation must be redefined, as relations between the countries have normalised. 
"We believe that relations between the two states have improved so that we need no Interstate Council, at least not in that form, since these are two sovereign, European states, and the issue of relations should be solved through institutions in charge," said Sulejman Tihic, the chairman of BiH's tripartite presidency. 
Speaking after the council's 10th session, held in Sarajevo on Thursday, Croatian President Stipe Mesic echoed his counterpart's words. "Our relations are good and are on an ascending line," he said. 
The BiH-Croatia Interstate Council was established nine years ago to facilitate co-operation between the two countries. It has been playing an advisory role in solving border and property disputes and other issues the two countries faced following the breakup of the former Yugoslavia. 
More than ten years after the end of the conflicts in the Balkans in the early 1990s, the issues the Croatian and BiH leaders discussed on Thursday included their countries' progress along the path of European integration. Croatia began its EU membership talks in October. Shortly after, BiH started its talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU, a key first step towards eventual membership. 
If BiH "is determined to progress on the European road, then we all must support this," because all Southeast European countries must become a part of the EU, Mesic said. 
Another issue he and Tihic discussed was constitutional reform in BiH, aimed at strengthening the countries' central institutions and facilitating its EU accession process. 
"Croatia welcomes all solutions which direct BiH towards the European model," Mesic said. At the same time, he added that constitutional changes should protect the interests of BiH's three main ethnic communities and provide mechanisms to ensure that the second phase of reform is not blocked. 
Tihic said the members of the Interstate Council reached a high level of consensus on all other issues discussed Thursday, including the use of the southern Croatian seaport of Ploce. Both parties agreed that the governments of the two countries should resolve this issue in line with existing contracts and European standards. 
The construction of a bridge to link the peninsula of Peljesac with the mainland was also on the agenda. Their joint position, according to Tihic, was that decisions should not be rushed and that experts should propose a solution that would address both sides' interests. 
Two regional issues the delegations discussed were the upcoming independence referendum in Montenegro and the ongoing UN-led talks on Kosovo's future status. 
They agreed that whatever the outcome of the Montenegrin referendum, it should be respected. Kosovo's status, the leaders said, should be treated as an issue between Belgrade and Pristina, but any solution should guarantee the rights of minorities in Kosovo. 
During his visit to Sarajevo, Mesic also announced a meeting of the presidents of BiH, Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro, to be held in Dubrovnik in the next few months. 
