13/12/2004
(Dnevnik.bg - 12/12/04; AFP, Sofia News Agency - 11/12/04; US Embassy in Bulgaria Web site, Reuters, AFP, Mediapool - 10/12/04) 
US Ambassador to Sofia James Pardew has faulted the Bulgarian judicial system over its inability to stamp out organised crime and handle corruption. Addressing a national judicial conference in Sofia on Friday (10 December), the US envoy was especially critical of prosecutors, saying their powers were often used for political purposes. 
"Today there is growing concern in Bulgaria and outside Bulgaria over the inability of the Bulgarian legal system to effectively fight organised crime and reduce the level of corruption, especially in the legal system," Pardew said. "These problems hinder investment, block economic development, stifle individual initiative, corrupt or drive away young people, and cost the state millions in lost revenues." 
Rather than blaming and pointing a finger at each other, the police, courts, investigators and prosecutors should bear their share of responsibility for the failure of the justice system to function properly, Pardew said. 
His remarks came days before the EU is expected to set a date for Bulgaria to sign its accession treaty. Brussels officials have warned that entry into the Union, scheduled for early 2007, could be delayed if Bulgaria fails to implement required reforms. 
"Organised crime dominates certain segments of the Bulgarian economy," Pardew said, noting that over 30 killings linked to crime mobs had taken place since he assumed his post in Sofia. "To date, not a single significant organised crime leader has been effectively prosecuted for any of these acts." 
None of the major drug bosses or counterfeiters has been brought to court despite great strides the country has made in interdicting drugs and dismantling counterfeit currency operations, he added. 
"As an outside observer, I cannot fail to see the power of the prosecution often used for blatantly political purposes, especially for intimidating the press or others who expose corruption," Pardew said, referring to recent threats by the prosecution to sue the BBC over a documentary that suggested Bulgaria's top sports official, Ivan Slavkov, was involved in high-level corruption. 
The incident was reminiscent of "the darkest days of oppression during the Cold War" and could damage Bulgaria's international reputation, according to Pardew. If prosecutors were ready to attack a major international news organisation for exposing corruption, he asked, what would they do against ordinary citizens? 
Urging the 1,600 judges attending the conference to take action "to stamp out organised crime, confront corruption, and consolidate the rule of law", Pardew said those are issues for public servants and private citizens to solve. 
"The international community will not decide how Bulgaria will move forward and at what pace, nor will the international community provide easy solutions for the problems I have outlined," he added. 
