24/07/2008
By Valentina Pop for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 24/07/08
"The Commission strongly encourages Romania to intensify its efforts in fighting corruption," said Johannes Laitenberger, the European Commission (EC) spokesman in Brussels who presented a negative report on Romania's judicial reform and fight against corruption. He pointed out that Romania "has put the fundamental elements of a functioning system in place. But the foundation is still fragile." 
Although the EC did not hit Romania with any of the sanctions suffered by Bulgaria, such as the suspension of EU funds amounting to 500m euros, it considers continued monitoring of Romania's judicial system and fight against corruption necessary. Some Romanian politicians, such as Social-Democratic Party leader Mircea Geoana, view the EC decision as proof that Romania is still not a full member of the EU club. "It is a clear failure and an undignified status for Romania, which continues to be a country on the EU's periphery," Geoana said on Wednesday (July 23rd). 
 Romanian EU commissioner Leonard Orban, in charge of EU's multilingualism policies, described the report as "a serious signal", adding that Bulgaria's sanctions should indicate the "enormous risks" Romania faces if it fails to fight corruption more vigorously. 
The EC report criticises the Romanian parliament for blocking a number of prominent high-level corruption probes and for trying to weaken the Penal Procedural Code to an extent that would endanger any meaningful investigation into all sorts of crimes. 
 "No real progress has been made in ten key cases involving former ministers. ... Efforts by the National Anti-corruption Directorate to continue investigations in some important cases have stalled as parliament has not recommended launching judicial procedures," the report states. 
In a preliminary version of the report leaked to the media, the EC even considered postponing Romania and Bulgaria's entry into the visa- and border-free Schengen zone and the single-currency system, should their judiciaries remain dysfunctional. 
The final report alludes vaguely to the "justice and home affairs" commitments Romania has vis-a-vis other member states and also warns that EU funds can be spent only if the system is free of fraud and conflicts of interest. 
"Romania has responsibilities vis-a-vis other member states, for example as part of justice and home affairs policy as well as in the common management of EU funds. Adequate administrative capacity and effective control of conflict of interest, fraud and financial irregularities are a necessary condition for Romania to fully benefit from EU pre-accession and structural funds," the report says. 
