09/05/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 09/05/11
Zana, a 39-year-old Albanian and mother of two boys, waited in line to cast her vote in central Tirana on Sunday (May 8th), believing her ballot is important. "One vote is one vote, but sometimes it can make a difference," she told SETimes. 
Her mother in law, Ajete, waiting to vote after her, is more concerned about the overall situation. "I hope there will be no problems; it's not worth it to fight each other for parties," she says. 
Sunday's local elections were seen as a major test for the country, which is trying to overcome more than two years of political instability. 
On Monday, according to media reports, the incumbent mayor, Socialist Party (SP) Chairman Edi Rama, is leading the mayoral race in Tirana by a slim margin of 1,000 votes, ahead of his Democratic Party (DP) challenger Lulzim Basha. 
"The victory in Tirana is clear. We are waiting now to hear about victory all over the country as well," Rama said. 
Opposition candidates are ahead in the biggest municipalities, including Elbasan, Korca, Vlora and Gjirokastra. 
SP candidate Jorgo Goro has won in Himara, an area traditionally governed by the Party for Human Rights and Freedoms (PBDNJ) of the Greek minority. Goro won against the PBDNJ candidate Vasil Bollano and two other candidates, one from the majority and one from another party representing the Greek minority, called Mega. 
The DP will recognise the official results, Prime Minister Sali Berisha said after the voting. "I invite my adversary to do the same," he said. 
"The country has gone through a quiet electoral process full of dignity, based on the elections law and with large participation," Berisha noted. 
Rama said the elections will be evaluated when the official results are released. "On the face of things, these were the best elections, but they were the ugliest ones in reality." He says state pressure and threats were exercised over Albanians. 
Central Election Commission head Arben Ristani said the counting process will be completed within two or three days. 
Around 50.9% of the 3.1 million registered voters participated in the vote. 
More than 4,900 voting centres opened at 7:00am and the majority of them closed at 7:00pm, with the exception of a few where people were still waiting to vote. 
No major incidents were reported. 
