18/01/2005
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 18/01/05
Albanian authorities have expressed their determination to eliminate a decades-old stockpile of chemical weapons within two years. The United States has pledged $18.3m to assist in the process. 
Last week, Albanian Defence Minister Pandeli Majko met with the head of the US State Department's Defence Threat Reduction Agency, Claesen D. Wyckoff, who was in Tirana leading a US military mission, to discuss the procedures that will lead to destroying the weapons. 
Majko said his government is ready to achieve this important goal and is committed to implementing the Chemical Weapons Convention. In 1993, Albania became one of the 167 states that have signed the convention, which requires the removal and destruction of all chemical weapons and agents. 
Albania declared the existence of its chemical stockpiles in 2003, prompting discussions with Washington about how best to secure the weapons and how to destroy them. The chemicals were bought from China during the 1970s by former communist dictator Enver Hoxha. 
"Destruction of chemical agents avoids the possibility of using them for evil-doing and it is an indicator of the contribution that our country is giving for the security and peace in the region," Deputy Defence Minister Besnik Baraj said. His ministry is working together with the environment ministry and other institutions to carry out the process. 
 "We are willing to stick to this project to destroy these poisoning substances by observing the rigorous criteria. It is in our interest that the impact of this activity on environment is at zero level," said Environment Minister Et'hem Ruka, who met with defence ministry representatives and the US delegation last week to outline steps to be followed. The country is expected to acquire a specially-built incinerator next year for use in destroying the stockpile. 
US State Department deputy spokesman Adam Ereli said that under an international agreement Albania is required to destroy the chemicals by 29 April 2007. 
