08/12/2008
(Reuters, AFP, BBC, Euronews, Kathimerini, Spiegel - 08/12/08; AP, DPA, FT, International Herald Tribune, ANA-MPA - 07/12/08)
Students clashed with police in Greece's northern city of Thessaloniki on Monday (December 8th) morning, as the country braced for a continuation of protests against the police killing of a 15-year-old schoolboy in Athens at the weekend. 
The riots, described as the worst to hit Greece in decades, erupted Saturday night, immediately after a policeman fatally shot Alexis Grigoropoulos in the capital's volatile district of Exarchia. The victim was among a group of about 30 youths who stoned a police car patrolling the area, which has seen numerous clashes between self-styled anarchists and the authorities. 
In response, a police officer identified as Epaminondas Korkoneas, 37, climbed out of the vehicle and fired three times. The bullets killed Grigoropoulos on the spot. 
Korkoneas, now under arrest for premeditated manslaughter, claimed the boy's death was the result of a ricochet, as he had fired only warning shots. Several witnesses , though, contend he aimed directly at the youth. 
Police also arrested a second officer, Vassilis Saraliotis, 31, who was in the car, for alleged complicity. 
Nearly 5,000 people joined the protests in Athens on Sunday, when the riots spread to other Greek cities, including Thessaloniki, Patras, Ioannina and Volos, as well as to the towns on the island of Crete. 
As the riots raged Sunday, police fired tear gas against the crowds in Athens, where they also reportedly detained 20 demonstrators. 
At least 34 people were injured in Sunday's clashes. 
Dozens of banks, supermarkets and other businesses have suffered property damage -- some of it substantial -- as the protests turned violent, despite Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis's promise that those responsible for the boy's death will receive due punishment. 
In a letter of condolence to the boy's parents, Karamanlis also vowed, "The state, as is its obligation, will do everything possible so that yesterday's tragedy is not repeated." 
Karamanlis, whose increasingly unpopular government lost two ministers in a recent financial scandal, rejected Interior Minister Prokopis Pavlopoulos's offer to resign Sunday. Public support for the prime minister's conservative party, New Democracy, has shrunk, and recent polls have shown it trailing the opposition socialist party, PASOK. 
Pavlopoulos appealed to the public for calm and assistance on Sunday, describing the boy's killing as an "isolated incident". 
"The police have and will have a defensive role in order to protect the property and lives of all Greek citizens," he said to the Athens News Agency. 
Meanwhile, the Greek Communist Party and PASOK, among other groups, have scheduled five demonstrations for Monday. 
Protesters have called a 24-hour general strike against the government's pension reforms and economic policies for Wednesday. 
