25/10/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 25/10/10
Dramatic developments have taken place in Kosovo over the past several weeks, starting with former President Fatmir Sejdiu's forced resignation in the wake of a Constitutional Court decision. 
That was followed by the announcement of early elections to be held in February. Within 24 hours, Sejdiu's Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) had left the government. Prime Minister Hashim Thaci now heads a cabinet that is lacking half its ministers, deputy ministers and other senior officials. 
Former allies turned adversaries, the LDK and Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) are angrily trading accusations. The LDK, which will hold its party congress on Saturday (October 30th), is undergoing a power struggle. 
Sejdiu is fighting to retain the LDK chairmanship, the very position which cost him the presidency of Kosovo. He faces a challenge from Bujar Bukoshi, a former health minister who once served in Ibrahim Rugova's government in exile. 
Bukoshi has denied media speculation that he and Rugova's son, Uke, will cause a split within the LDK. 
 "It is not true that Uke and I will form a new party or a fraction within the LDK as said in some media," he said, stressing that he will accept whatever results come out of the party congress. 
Meanwhile, the PDK remains united behind Thaci, and members re-elected him as party head by acclamation on Sunday. The victory was an easy one, since he ran unopposed. 
Thaci, who has been at the helm of the party since its establishment in 1999, now gets another four-year mandate. He expressed confidence that the PDK will continue to govern Kosovo. 
 He also spoke for the first time about the reasons for the breakup of the former ruling coalition. He claimed that Sejdiu asked him not to accept as valid the Constitutional Court's verdict, which found the ex-president had violated the country's constitution by holding office and the LDK leadership simultaneously. 
Thaci and his party continue to press for snap elections by mid-December, saying they are needed because of the upcoming talks with Serbia as well as a host of domestic reasons, including the privatisation process, approval of the state budget, and various infrastructure projects. 
Speaking to local media on Saturday, PDK presidency member Xhavit Haliti said two or three parliamentary parties, as well as some minority formations, have indicated they will back early elections. Media reports are citing December 12th as a possible date for the vote. 
Meanwhile, the Working Group on Elections has already taken some important decisions with the consensus of Kosovo's political parties. The elections will be certified via an international mechanism and citizens will be able to vote from outside Kosovo. 
