01/09/2011
By Ljiljana Smiljanic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 01/09/11
Eighteen years after the biggest mosque in Banja Luka, Ferhat Pasha Mosque (Ferhadija), was demolished, Muslims in this town had a chance to hold morning prayer there for Ramadan Bayram (Eid ul-Fitr ), which started on Tuesday (August 30th) and runs through Thursday. 
The reconstruction of the 500-year-old mosque -- which is under the protection of UNESCO -- is not finished yet, but enough progress has been made that it could be opened to people this week. 
"The columns are already done, which was the most important and risky part of the job for us. The third dome is being built, and preparations are underway for the main dome," mufti Edhem Camdzic said, adding that the main gate was also finished with a donation from the Spanish government via UNESCO. 
"You could see joy, but also tears of happiness and disbelief of some Bosniaks, because they could not believe that we would be able to pray between Ferhadija's walls," Camdzic said. 
"This is a great Muslim holiday. We have been fasting for 29 days. We have not been eating or drinking. Only after evening prayer can one eat or drink," Sena, a woman from Banja Luka, told SETimes. 
Besides messages of co-existence, good relations and tolerance in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Banja Luka, Camdzic also reminded Bosnian authorities and Republiks Srpska leaders not to forget Ferhadija. 
More money is needed to complete the work. Reconstruction is difficult, as the aim is for the mosque to look as authentic as possible. 
Camdzic said more Bosniaks have been returning to Banja Luka with the improvement of security, but the returnee process is not complete. 
"This process will not be finished until everyone returns to their towns and villages, as well as their working places and their properties: Bosniaks and Croats to Banja Luka, and Serbs and Croats to Sarajevo, as well as Bosniaks and Serbs to Mostar or Stolac." 
After the morning prayer, Muslims in Banja Luka continued their celebration of Ramadan Bayram in a traditional way. Men visited the graves of ancestors, while women prepared traditional dishes like borek and baklava at home. 
They shared good wishes with family and friends, and parents then gave presents to their children. It is also a custom for youth and children to visit other elders and receive gifts from them as well. 
