07/02/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 02/07/05
Under a textile agreement signed with Brussels in December, Serbia will be allowed quota- and duty-free exports to the EU market starting on 1 March. In return, the country agreed to phase out its own tariffs on textiles imported from the Union over the next three years. In 1991, the EU banned textile imports from Serbia as part of international trade sanctions against the Milosevic regime. Three years later, however, it introduced quotas for 12 categories of products in direct imports and six types of third-party manufacturing. The quotas severely restricted Serbia's potential for exports to the EU market. 
The EU accounts for 70 per cent of Serbia's overall textile exports, and the deal is expected to lift export levels, which stood at 146m euros in 2004, to more than 350m euros in 2005. Industry leaders filled the quotas during the first four months of 2004, and are expected to post good results. But the sector as a whole is burdened with low productivity, huge debts and interrupted privatisation. 
In addition, the WTO's decision to abolish its own quotas as of 1 January will mean a far more competitive environment. As the high productivity and low labour costs of countries like China change the face of the global textile market, Serbian manufacturers will have to adjust by cutting prices and raising efficiency -- and perhaps by concentrating on a small line of fashion garments, says Wolfgang Weiss, head of a German government project for the recovery of Serbia's textile sector. 
Similar ideas have been suggested by USAID, which has been helping to form a textile industry cluster as part of a project to develop Serbia's private sector. Nine companies have been selected so far for the cluster, including the children's fashion apparel maker Todor, which is already exporting to the US market. 
Serbia does have some advantages: a long apparel-making tradition, a skilled workforce, high-quality products, low production costs and proximity to the EU, Weiss noted at an industry seminar in February last year. However, local manufacturers should stop pinning their hopes solely on Western Europe and look to the vast Russian market as well, he added. 
