06/11/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 06/11/06
Albania's Mother Teresa International Airport, located in the suburbs of Tirana, will be modernised by next spring, according to the firms undertaking the renovation work. 
New terminals for the passengers and goods, as well as a new road connecting the capital with the airport, are being constructed by the German company Hochtief, which is part of a consortium awarded a concession by the Albanian government. The modernisation project kicked off two years ago. 
"This means more qualitative services for the citizens, not only Albanians, but also for tourists who will come to Albania," Prime Minister Sali Berisha said as he inspected the construction last month. "The modern airport will help to change the poor image that Albania has in other countries, and attract more visitors," he added. 
Mother Teresa International Airport is the most important hub of transportation in Albania and the country's only international airport. In 2005, it was used by close to 785,000 passengers -- 22% more than in the previous year. 
Under a privatisation agreement sealed in October 2004, operational responsibility for airport management was placed in the hands of the Tirana Airport Partners (TAP) consortium. This consists of Hochtief, Deutsche Investitions und Entwicklungsgesellschaft, and the Albanian-American Enterprise Fund. TAP will run the airport for the next 20 years. 
"Tirana's airport is getting a facelift," the TAP said in a statement. "The new terminal sets standards for Albania and is thus making its own special contribution to the way the capital city is changing." 
In recent years, Albania has drawn the attention of a number of international carriers. These include Austrian Airlines, Hungary's Malev, Greece's Olympic Airlines, Serbia's JAT, Italy's Alitalia, Slovenia's Adria Airways, Turkish Airlines, British Airways and Bulgaria's Hemus Air. All offer regular, scheduled flights to Tirana. 
Several domestic companies, such as Albanian Airlines, also offer direct flights to and from EU countries. 
