29/05/2009
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 29/05/09
At the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia's (SDSM) ninth congress last week in Skopje, delegates unanimously elected former President Branko Crvenkovski -- the sole candidate -- to lead the party during the next four years. 
 In his acceptance speech Sunday (May 24th), Crvenkovski acknowledged that the SDSM is in a deep and long-term crisis. "Our goal is to consolidate the party," he explained, adding the party's objective is to win the parliamentary elections. 
To accomplish that, the party needs deep reforms, according to Crvenkovski, noting that a new party programme with strict "house rules" will be outlined by August. 
Some leading SDSM members, expecting Crvenkovski to unify the party's different fractions, were surprised to hear he "will not spend one second trying to pacify anyone". He explained that the "SDSM is open to everyone, but can also exist without some." 
The SDSM will also form a new party structure, since the central and supervisory commitee members collectively resigned. 
Representatives of other political parties were also invited, including Tito Petkovski, leader of the New Social Democratic Party, whose political support has helped the SDSM. Representatives of the ruling VMRO-DPMNE and the Democratic Union for Integration were also present. 
Much of Crvenkovski's speech was a laundry list of government grievances. He called on the cabinet to accept "responsibility for the lost time and suffered damage" for failing to reach a compromise with Greece, labeling its members "traitors and foreign mercenaries". 
Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski congratulated Crvenkovski, but criticised him for being "the same Crvenkovski from 15-20 years ago", during a period "of corruption when crime blossomed". Gruevski said he expects nothing but Crvenkovski's "old political games, tricks and subversion". 
 More than half of those who participated in a poll by the weekly Forum said Crvenkovski will not help the SDSM's ratings among voters. 
Concerned SDSM-supporters, pensioners and some jobless people actually formed an NGO called "Resistance Against Branko Crvenkovski". 
"Macedonia must not go again through … decades of corruption and crime," said a member of the group. Others accused the NGO of being a government ploy. 
The SDSM also changed its party symbol from a rose in a blue star to a clenched fist, the symbol of European social democracy. 
