29/03/2010
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 29/03/10
Gjoko Taneski, a 33-year-old singer from Ohrid, will represent Macedonia at the 2010 Eurovision contest in Oslo with "I Have the Power". 
Taneski won in a dramatic finish in Skopje's Universal Hall over Vlatko Ilievski's "Happiness". The popular pop singer Maja Vukicevic came in third with the song "Fame". 
Suspense built as the jury announced the winner, prompting strong applause from one half of the audience and frowns sprinkled with some booing from the other. 
It was a neck-and-neck race between Taneski and Ilievski in votes from the viewing public. But a six-person jury ultimately decides and Taneski emerged the victor. 
 Few would have predicted the outcome. "Taneski represents a complete surprise this year as his name was not even circulated before the national qualifying contest," long-time music connoisseur and Eurovision enthusiast Aleksandar Hristov told SETimes 
The winner could not hide his excitement when the jury made its selection. "The right song was chosen, and I expect the approval of that choice to be [crowned with] success in Oslo," he said. 
Taneski and Ilievski are close friends and -- after greeting the runner-up -- the winner said "God willing, may he win next year." Taneski also expressed thanks to "all those that voted for me, my fans, the jury, and my team, which stood behind me". 
To those dissatisfied with the jury's decision, the ebullient Taneski encouraged them to "hear the song again and then understand it is the right one for Eurovision". 
 "I want to sing in English in Oslo, but the more I hear the song, that much more I like it in Macedonian, so I don't know," he explained. 
"What remains is that I maximally prepare for an ever-more convincing appearance in Oslo," he said, and joked that he will work on his fitness. 
As part of the show in the Universal Hall before and after the contest, former Eurovision contestant and veteran Macedonian singer Karolina Gocheva held a mini concert. BiH's Eurovision representative Vukasin Braic and Albania's Juliana Pasha performed as special guests, as did the Macedonian bands Sintezis and Next Time. 
