22/05/2006
(BNN - 22/05/06; Sofia News Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg, Official Web Site of the Bulgarian President - 21/05/06)
Bulgaria must take urgent steps to address issues that could impede its January 2007 entry into the EU, President Georgi Parvanov said on Sunday (21 May), stressing the need for stronger action in the fight against crime and corruption. 
Speaking to reporters in the Black Sea resort city of Varna, Parvanov said that the European Commission's (EC) monitoring report released on 16 May showed that Bulgaria was still insufficiently prepared for EU membership. It has four more months to deal with lingering problems before the EC issues its next crucial assessment of the country's readiness to join the Union on 1 January 2007 as planned. 
Last week's report listed six areas of serious concern that Bulgaria must urgently address. During the next four months Sofia must show "clearer evidence of results in investigating and prosecuting organised crime networks", "more effective and efficient implementation of laws for the fight against fraud and corruption" and "intensified enforcement of anti-money laundering provisions". Bulgaria must also strengthen financial control for the future use of structural and cohesion funds and boost administration in agriculture. If the country fails to deal with those problems, it could see its EU entry delayed until January 2008. 
Although these are only six out of the 145 fields monitored by the EU, failure in achieving the required results in any of the "red flag" areas could impede Bulgaria's timely accession, Parvanov said. 
Bulgaria can fulfil the tasks it faces in the fight against money laundering, the president said, calling for the urgent adoption of two bills already submitted to parliament -- namely, the law on measures against money laundering and a new Penal Code. 
As concerns the fight against corruption, Parvanov reiterated his proposal for the establishment of an independent service on combating corruption, stressing that old methods cannot yield qualitative results. The proposed body should have guaranteed independence from the institutions subject to its control, he said. 
Bulgaria must show in the next four months is that there is no one in the executive, legislative or judicial power that is above the law, the president said, calling for changes in legislation regulating the activities of political parties. 
Urging politicians and government officials to make public their incomes and assets, Parvanov said he would reveal his and his family's holdings Monday. "I hope that this would set an example for other politicians to do so too," he said. 
