21/04/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 21/04/10
Bucharest and two surrounding counties -- Ilfov and Giurgiu -- will modernise their aging electricity network over a five-year period in a project estimated to cost about 700m euros. 
The announcement was made last month by Enel Romania, the country's largest private electricity distributor, with 2.5 million customers. 
 "All inhabitants of Bucharest, Ilfov and Giurgiu will benefit from an electricity infrastructure [that meets] EU standards," said company president Claudio Zito. 
The project is the largest of this kind to be implemented in Romania and will employ 2.000 electricians and 150 engineers. The new network is expected to raise distribution capacity by 40% while reducing by half the number and duration of power outages. 
 More than half of the current electrical infrastructure in Bucharest is about 50 years old, and the system often breaks down. The overhaul will begin in the capital's downtown, where there have been 250 reported blackouts in two years. 
"We will replace the outdated technologies from the 1950s and 1960s with the most advanced ones now available in Europe," said Zito, noting that Enel hopes to have replaced 22 transformers in Bucharest by 2013. 
Romanians -- so often in the dark -- have long waited for this news. 
"Blackouts are part of our lives," said Victor Stanila, who lives in the Pantelimon area of Ilfov County, one of those most affected by power outages. 
"They happen unexpectedly, mostly during winter holidays and the cold season when we are left without heat," Stanila said. "People were frustrated and often took to the streets to protest because no one seemed to heed our complaints." 
 "We were always given an excuse that outages happened because of electricity theft and overloading the already old network, but no one seemed to address the recurring problems," he said. 
Over the winter holidays of 2007, street protests over electricity shortages resulted in clashes with police, after hundreds of residents of Pantelimon and Voluntari were left without power for 30 hours. 
Last year, Enel did an assessment that found the amount of electricity lost to theft in Romania was enough to power a city of a half-million for a full year. 
