12/08/2008
(Dnevnik - 10/08/08; Europe.bg - 08/08/08; BTA, Europe.bg, Bulgarian Government - 07/08/08)
The Bulgarian government approved a series of measures Thursday (August 7th) to address problems and shortcomings in the management of EU funds and to fight organised crime and corruption. 
The move came about a fortnight after the European Commission (EC) froze nearly 500m euros in aid to the Balkan nation because of its failure to address persistent weaknesses in those areas during its 18-month membership in the Union. It also withdrew the accreditation of two state agencies implementing funds under the PHARE pre-accession programme over suspected cases of fraud and irregularity, but said it would reverse the decision after Sofia takes corrective action. 
The 200-page action plan adopted by the Bulgarian cabinet last week details the specific measures the country will take by the end of this year. 
These include compiling a list of people and companies proven to have violated EU rules or being investigated for fraud by September 15th and increasing the staff of key agencies handling European funds by the end of December. In addition, new independent audits of the two agencies that lost accreditation are due by September 10th and a report detailing all cases of irregularity and fraud in the management of EU funding is expected by September 23rd. 
The action plan also lists 80 measures the government will take by the end of 2008 in judicial reform and the fight against organised crime and corruption. 
For example, a new specialised unit dealing with organised crime will operate within the interior ministry by September 15th. These and other steps listed in the document seek to improve the interaction among the ministry, the State Agency on National Security (SANC) and prosecutors. 
Other measures coming next month include changes to the anti-corruption commission under the council of ministers and the establishment of a parliamentary subcommittee to exercise control over SANC's activities. 
Changes in the regulatory framework, obliging banks to list the specific amount of any transaction exceeding 30,000 leva (about 15,000 euros), are due by October 15th as part of efforts to stamp out money laundering. 
By the end of November, every court in Bulgaria must have its own web site for posting all its rulings and verdicts. The adoption of amendments to the penalty code that the EU has long demanded and a unified code of ethics of magistrates are also scheduled for November. 
Changes in the legislation regulating the financing of political parties and further steps against corruption in the health system and in other sectors are envisioned for December. 
