02/04/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 02/04/09 
The Serbian government, formed in June 2008, set quick admission to the EU as its main priority. However, during a visit to Austria earlier this week, Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said the goal would not be easy to achieve. After a meeting Monday (March 30th) with Austrian counterpart Michael Spindelegger, Jeremic said that Serbia's European integration is encountering "strong resistance", adding that "it would not be as quick or as easy as expected." 
Serbia and the EU signed the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) on April 29th 2008, but the document remains frozen until Belgrade achieves full co-operation with The Hague tribunal. Although 26 of the 27 EU member states wanted to start implementing the SAA this year, the Netherlands halted Serbia's EU bid, demanding that Belgrade extradite war crimes fugitive Ratko Mladic before negotiations with the Union begin. 
Also affecting Serbia's accession are the global economic crisis and some EU member states' calls -- primarily Germany's -- to halt further EU enlargement. In addition, Belgrade has refused to recognise the independence of Kosovo. 
However, Spindelegger said Austria would consistently support Serbia on its path to the EU. "We see our role as representative of Serbia's interests," he said. 
Jeremic thanked Austria for its support but said he doubts that resistance to the Western Balkans' inclusion in the EU would ease anytime soon. He noted that Serbia is ready to work on its other priority -- the annulment of EU countries' visa requirements for Serbian citizens. "I believe [annulment] will be possible by the end of this year," Jeremic said. 
 EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn confirmed the Union's goals regarding visa liberalisation for the Western Balkans. Addressing EU lawmakers on Tuesday, Rehn said that the EC wants "to move further" on this matter, which he termed "very important for the citizens of the Western Balkans". 
Spindelegger and Jeremic also discussed economic issues. Jeremic asked him to provide assurances that Austrian banks -- which control a third of the Serbian financial sector -- will not pull their money out of Serbia. 
Last week, Belgrade completed a strict arrangement with the IMF. One of the conditions of the loan is that Serbian officials reach an agreement with foreign banks and financial institutions to reprogramme the country's debt. 
