24/05/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 24/05/10
Serbia's parliament has adopted a declaration condemning the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, and is now getting ready to pass a second declaration condemning war crimes against Serbs. The decision to treat the two sets of war crimes separately has proved controversial. 
Associations representing the families of Serb victims say it is disrespectful. They want lawmakers to adopt a single document covering all war crimes committed during the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia. 
"Why are some victims separated from others, why are some given advantage over others and why is the weight of a crime measured only by numbers?" asks Cedomir Maric, head of the Association of Families of the Missing and Killed in Krajina and Croatia. 
Many Serb victims, Maric says, were killed in a monstrous manner and now are being "humiliated and minimised". 
 "About 47,000 Serbs were killed in clashes in the former Yugoslavia -- from Slovenia to Kosovo and Metohija -- 4,600 of whom are still registered as missing," Maric told SETimes. 
Opposition parties have seized on the issue. According to Slobodan Samardzic, an MP representing the Democratic Party of Serbia, the ruling party's approach is a mistake. 
 "First they separated one group of victims, the Bosniak victims of Srebrenica and other Muslim victims, and now another group consists of the Serbs," Samardzic said. "The first declaration was for international use, while this one is for internal use and the majority population." 
Some within Serbia, however, welcome parliament's decision to single out Srebrenica for special mention. 
"Srebrenica is a big disgrace for us and the parliament was right to pass a document through which we would condemn it," Professor of Literature Ljubodrag Kesic said. "Someone killed those innocent people in the name of the Serbian people and we must face that, so that something like that never happens again." 
The declaration condemning the slaughter in Srebrenica was passed in late March. The new declaration, covering all crimes against Serbs committed during the wars of the 1990s, is due for adoption in June. 
The new declaration will not specify particular crimes, but will highlight the suffering of the Serb people in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Kosovo, Parliament Speaker Slavica Djukic-Dejanovic said. 
She said parliament will call on the parliaments of neighbouring countries to also condemn all crimes committed against Serbs, because, as she put it, that was the basis for final reconciliation in the Balkans. 
