02/12/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 02/12/11
Just over a week before Serbia's candidacy review in the EU, Serbian President Boris Tadic urged Kosovo Serbs and KFOR to cool down tensions and avoid casualties surrounding the barricades local Serbs erected in late July to oppose the deployment of Kosovo customs officers at the border crossings to Serbia. 
 On Tuesday (November 29th), Tadic also called on KFOR to stop removing the barricades, saying that the operation carried risks, jeopardized the lives of citizens and did not contribute to the resolution of the situation in Kosovo's north. 
 "The barricades do not help the defense of Serbian national interests in Kosovo and Metohija; on the contrary, they jeopardize them. The blockade must be abolished and transport and communication must be ensured, with the continuation of the fight for Serb rights," Tadic said. 
At a meeting of the EU foreign ministers on Thursday, High EU Representative for Foreign Policy and Security Catherine Ashton backed Tadic's call. 
 "I am very concerned about violence in the north, I am very concerned that you will both be able to make progress towards Europe," Ashton said. Political representatives of the Serbs from northern Kosovo, however, received Tadic's call with restraint. 
Kosovo Mitrovica Mayor Krstimir Pantic told SETimes that Tadic's call "came as an unpleasant surprise to me, as well as to the other Serbs in northern Kosovo, who have been at the barricades for four months now. " 
 Pantic also said the representatives of the municipalities in northern Kosovo could not decide on their own whether the barricades would be removed -- they must consult with the deputies in their municipalities. 
Milos Z., a citizen of Kosovska Mitrovica, tells SETimes he does not understand why Tadic has only just now called for the removal of the barricades. "
We have been at the barricades for four months. Why hasn't he urged us to move from the barricades sooner, if he feels that way? Why didn't he remove us after the clashes with KFOR on September 27th?" he asked. Milos thinks this was done under pressure from the EU over Serbia's potential membership candidacy, which will be decided at the EU summit on December 9th. 
"It's not fair to sacrifice us for the candidacy. We've been fighting to live in the state of Serbia for 12 years and we are now very affected by Tadic's position," he said. Certain analysts also believe this is a big turn in Tadic's Kosovo policy. 
"Tadic's call is a last throw of the dice ahead of the December 9th deadline that will determine whether or not Serbia secures candidate status," Ian Bancroft, co-founder of the organisation TransConflict, which deals with the resolving of conflicts in the Balkans, told SETimes. 
"It is a U-turn that is designed to appease those European countries -- particularly Germany -- who have repeatedly called on Belgrade to do more to, in their view, 'tame' the north," he said. 
 "The problem for Tadic is that Europe has asked him to deliver more then he is capable of delivering, particularly when it concerns the so-called 'parallel institutions' in the north. This latest attempt to placate the EU is unlikely to be sufficient, and will resonate badly with an electorate increasingly perceiving the EU's conditions on Kosovo as akin to blackmail," Bancroft said. 
However, Kosovo Compromise project director Aleksandar Mitic says Tadic's call is no surprise, because it is a continuation of the "self-destructive policy" that makes moves under pressure. 
 "By calling for the removal of the barricades, Tadic has 'played it safe' -- on the one hand, he wanted to absolve himself of responsibility for any sort of violence, while on the other hand showing Berlin he has done everything in his power, but wields no influence over the Serbs in northern Kosovo," he said. 
According to him, it is possible that Tadic's call will be enough for Serbia to obtain candidate status this month, but that status is not particularly important without the setting of a date for the beginning of negotiations with the EU. 
 "However, the Kosovo Serbs do not trust Tadic and will continue, one way or another, to obstruct any establishment of Pristina's authority in northern Kosovo," Mitic said. 
