14/02/2005
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 14/02/05
After much speculation, at the end of 2004 Croatia finally received a date for the start of accession talks with the EU. The Union's member states agreed that the negotiations should begin on 17 March, at the intergovernmental conference which will be called by the next country to the rotating EU presidency, namely Luxembourg. 
 The ruling Croatian Democratic Party (HDZ) hailed this achievement as a great success for the country, which only a few years ago was mired in international isolation. However, the EU also made it clear that a major stumbling block -- the failure to extradite indicted war criminals, particularly retired General Ante Gotovina -- must be overcome before the talks can get under way. Zagreb has only weeks left to convince EU member states that it is fully co-operating with the UN tribunal at The Hague. 
Among EU members, Britain has been the strongest and most consistent critic of Zagreb's track record with regard to the UN court. It gave its approval for setting a date only after months of blocking the process because of the Gotovina issue. Although London -- together with the Scandinavian countries -- is perceived as taking an especially tough stance, the EU as a whole agrees on the need for Zagreb to fulfil its international obligations, according to former European Commission President Romano Prodi. 
 "Don’t make the mistake of thinking that this principle is not important for other countries. [Britain and Scandinavia] are saying publicly what the majority, perhaps not quite everyone, is actually thinking," Prodi said in an interview for the Croatian weekly Globus. 
 Although each member country, as well as the European Commission itself, is free to form its own view of how well Croatia is co-operating with The Hague, it is generally agreed that UN chief prosecutor Carla del Ponte's assessment will be the most important influencing factor. Del Ponte visited the Balkans last week and then headed to Brussels to brief EU officials about the current state of relations between the former Yugoslav republics and the tribunal. She is expected to submit a written report sometime this month. 
 "The government of Croatia is in a position to arrange the transfer to The Hague," del Ponte has said. She and other international officials have repeatedly criticised Croatian authorities for failing to put pressure on a network of supporters believed to be helping the fugitive evade justice. Many in the EU believe that a more thorough, higher-quality police investigation of Gotovina's connections, communications and sources of support could easily lead to him. While assuring Zagreb that it won't be required to achieve the impossible, Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkende has called on authorities to demonstrate they are exerting a maximum effort to locate and arrest the fugitive. 
Croatian authorities have acknowledged the urgency of meeting this condition. "I hope that Gotovina himself will realise that any further prolongation can only be harmful to him and to Croatia," Prime Minister Ivo Sanader has said. Speaking anonymously, a foreign ministry official said the government agrees that Gotovina must stand trial at The Hague, and that there are no alternatives. 
"Any official in Croatia who publicly expresses solidarity with Gotovina must realise that he is directly breaking Croatian law. That is why Gotovina’s pictures cannot be exhibited on official state premises," the official said. 
While retaining a certain degree of skepticism about such statements, the Council of Europe (CoE) has welcomed the progress which the country has achieved in preparing for the start of negotiations. The CoE called on the European Commission to propose a framework for negotiations, taking into account the experience of the EU's recent expansion. At the same time, it reiterated that the membership negotiations will only begin once the issue of ICTY co-operation is resolved. 
Meanwhile, discussions are under way in Zagreb concerning the makeup of the negotiating team, which will include representatives of all parliamentary parties, not only the HDZ. "This will be a very expert team," Deputy Prime Minister and former presidential candidate Jadranka Kosor said. 
The first six negotiators will be appointed once Croatia finds out from the European Commission which negotiating areas will be opened first, with the other negotiators to follow. The barrel holding the names of potential negotiators currently holds the names of 70 experts, with each subsequent one expected to come from the ranks of state administration. Croatian diplomats say they anticipate negotiations with the EU will conclude in around 30 months, and by the end of 2007 at the latest. 
