02/08/2006
(Novinar - 02/08/06; Sofia News Agency, Sofia Echo, Vseki Den, Mediapool, Dnevnik - 01/08/06; Angus Reid - 19/07/06)
After months of efforts to reach agreement on a common nominee for the 22 October presidential election, eight Bulgarian right-wing parties failed again Tuesday (1 August) to iron out their differences. 
Only four of the parties -- the Democrats for Strong Bulgaria (DSB), the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF), the Union of Free Democrats and the Democratic Party -- confirmed their support for Constitutional Court Chairman Nedelcho Beronov. The other four, including two agrarian parties, the Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organisation and Gergyovden, remained undecided, with some saying further talks were needed. 
Beronov, 78, was nominated for the post by the DSB in early July. Three weeks later, UDF leader Petar Stoyanov, who lost the battle for a second presidential term in 2001 and had announced his decision to run again in this year's poll, unexpectedly dropped his plans, saying he would instead back Beronov. 
"The UDF will work hard for victory at the presidential elections," Stoyanov said as he announced his decision. 
Meanwhile, voicing concern over the eight parties' failure to come up with a commonly supported candidate, the council of the Bulgarian Agrarian National Union - People's Union nominated its leader, Anastasia Mozer, for the post. 
Following Tuesday's meeting, Gergyovden leader Lyuben Dilov was quoted as saying that Beronov and Mozer are well-respected people and consultations should continue. But the party reportedly would prefer to see Stoyanov, the DSB's Ivan Kostov or Sofia Mayor Boyko Borissov chosen as the rightist candidate. 
Agreeing on a common nominee is widely seen as the right wing's only chance for victory. 
Incumbent Georgi Parvanov, who was the leader of the Bulgarian Socialist Party until he assumed the presidency in 2001, is one of the most popular politicians in Bulgaria. He is widely expected to run for re-election this year, but has yet to confirm it. 
A recent poll, conducted by the National Centre for Research of Public Opinion before Stoyanov's pullout, showed that 34.6 per cent of respondents would vote for Parvanov. 
With 4.5 per cent support, Stoyanov came in third after Borissov, the unofficial leader of the Citizens for European Development of Bulgaria, who was backed by 14.8 per cent of respondents. 
Usually ranked the most popular politician in surveys, the Sofia mayor and former chief interior ministry secretary said last week he does not plan to join the presidential race. He suggested, however, that his formation could come up with its own nominee. 
Beronov is respected and "probably a very good person," Borissov said. However, he added, Bulgaria needs an energetic president in view of the tasks and challenges the country will face as an EU member. Bulgaria is scheduled to join the Union on 1 January 2007. 
Beronov is not a member of any political party and has not played a prominent role outside judicial circles. Still unclear is whether he would be able to mobilise and unite the estimated 2 million supporters of right-wing parties. 
