07/09/2009
 (AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA - 05/09/09; Wall Street Journal, Reuters - 02/09/09; B92 - 03/08/09; Euronews - 01/08/09; AFP, AP, DPA, Javno.hr - 31/07/09)
Croatia and Slovenia are close to resolving their 18-year border dispute, the two countries' foreign ministers said on Saturday (September 5th) in statements backed by EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. 
"I believe that Croatians and Slovenians will arrive at a win-win situation very soon," Croatian Foreign Minister Gordan Jandrokovic told reporters on the sidelines of a two-day meeting of the 27 EU-members states' top diplomats that opened in Stockholm on Friday. "We are working very hard now and I believe very soon I will inform you about good news." 
His Slovenian counterpart, Samuel Zbogar, appeared equally optimistic about prospects of a deal, saying the recently strained relations between the two countries have improved since their prime ministers' met in late July. 
 "We've built a lot of trust, we've built mutual respect, we understand each other better," Zbogar said. "We talk bilaterally, which is all a big improvement from the last months. And I think we are getting there," he added, but noted that there is still some work to be done. 
The dispute over several small villages and the maritime border between the two Adriatic states dates back to 1991, when both proclaimed independence from the former Yugoslavia. 
The row has become a major hurdle on Croatia's path to EU membership. Slovenia, which joined the Union in 2004, has been blocking both the opening of new chapters in Zagreb's negotiations with Brussels, as well as the provisional closure of those already discussed, over the issue since December. 
Croatia was supposed to wrap up its entry talks by the end of this year. But discussions on 13 of the 35 negotiating chapters that must be completed before a country can join the 27-nation bloc have not opened yet. 
 Following talks on July 31st, the prime ministers of Croatia and Slovenia, Jadranka Kosor and Borut Pahor, both voiced optimism that their countries' long-running dispute will be resolved in the interest of both nations within the coming months. 
"We found a way and I am happy that we began discussing things which are in the interest of both countries," Kosor said after her first meeting with her Slovenian counterpart since she became Croatia's first woman prime minister in July. 
Sounding equally positive about the prospects of a final deal by the end of this year, Pahor said it "would solve the two vital issues -- Croatia's EU accession negotiations and an agreement on the border". 
The two leaders offered no details. According to reports, they had agreed that further talks would be held as discreetly as possible. 
 Speaking in Stockholm on Saturday, Rehn said a compromise would likely be announced within weeks. 
"We expect [it] this autumn, but the sooner the better," the AFP quoted him as saying. "If the momentum can be maintained and if we can unblock Croatia's EU accession negotiations shortly, I would expect that in the course of the first half of next year we could see the conclusion of the technical negotiations between Croatia and the EU." 
Addressing the European Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee earlier this month, Rehn said Croatia must also co-operate fully with the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague and meet "the outstanding benchmarks in time" to be able to wrap up its talks with the EU in 2010. 
