18/05/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 18/05/07
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn was in Belgrade on Wednesday (May 16th), becoming the first international official to pay a visit since the establishment of the country's new government. 
He told Serbian officials that the country could resume Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) talks -- interrupted in May 2006 -- when the new government starts fully co-operating with The Hague tribunal. 
Rehn said he is confident in Serbia's European future, and that he was "encouraged to see co-operation with The Hague tribunal as the priority of this government". Resumption of the SAA talks could take place in "a matter of days or weeks" if the conditions are met, he said. These include taking measures that will lead to the arrest of General Ratko Mladic and other war crimes indictees and their transfer to the UN tribunal. 
The EU commissioner also noted the seriousness of the police search for Mladic in downtown Belgrade on Tuesday. According to the daily Politika, military police searched the 300 rooms of the Deligrad military hotel, looking for both Mladic and indictee Zdravko Tolimir, considered one of the general's top security aides. 
Rehn met with Serbian President Boris Tadic, whose Democratic Party has the majority of cabinet positions in the new government, and with Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica. 
Tadic told a news conference that as head of the National Security Council -- which co-ordinates all security and intelligence services -- he is taking over a portion of responsibility for co-operation with The Hague. 
"I will insist on the finalisation of co-operation with The Hague tribunal and the swiftest possible resumption of the SAA talks with the EU. Since we have lost a year on the road to EU integration, we must now double our pace and work much more in that field. And I will keep convincing Olli Rehn that without Serbia, the EU is not whole, and that with Serbia the EU will be much better off," Tadic said. 
The new cabinet will do everything to wrap up co-operation with The Hague tribunal "as soon as possible", Kostunica said. He also presented Rehn with his cabinet's programme, and reiterated the country's position on Kosovo. Supervised autonomy for Kosovo is the only plausible solution, he argued. 
The Kosovo issue would not affect Serbia's association with the EU, Rehn said in an interview with Belgrade's TV B92. He added that these were two separate processes, and that Kosovo's status was now being debated in the UN. 
