09/12/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 09/12/10
Sunday's (December 12th) elections in Kosovo will be monitored heavily by the EU as well as by several other international and local organisations to ensure the vote meets international standards. 
On Tuesday, EU Special Representative Pieter Feith announced the so-called Kosovo Election Watch 2010, which will support the parliamentary elections. 
"The EU has made important efforts to bring together diplomatic watchers from member states and from other countries to encourage elections that generally meet international standards in Kosovo," Feith said. 
Under the plan, "more than 120 Election Watch teams will be following every stage of the election process in polling stations across Kosovo," he said. 
The teams will include members of the International Civilian Representative Office and EU Special Representative Office, members of diplomatic missions in Kosovo, diplomats from other EU member states and diplomats from the Western Balkans region. 
Feith said the deployment plan "will ensure Kosovo-wide coverage and reporting to a central operations room throughout the day". 
"We want to see that these elections meet the highest international standards. Everyone has a role to play in this: the political parties through their behaviour, by respecting the Code of Conduct they have signed, and citizens through their participation," Feith said, praising the work done by local election agencies such as the Central Election Commission (CEC). 
The network of NGOs Democracy in Action is monitoring campaigning, voting and campaign spending. 
"5,000 observers will be engaged [on Election Day], to monitor the voting and the counting process," organisation member Driton Selmanaj told SETimes, adding that there will also be mobile teams to offer support. 
 The campaign so far has been largely quiet and democratic, Selmanaj said, despite what he described as "isolated incidents". 
The PDK and LDK have exchanged accusations of inappropriate behaviour. The PDK, for instance, alleges that "certain structures" associated with its rival disrupted a party meeting in a Pristina neighbourhood. 
Democracy in Action has also noted violations of the Code of Conduct. It says civil servants have been observed putting propaganda material in public buildings, while some election material has been vandalised. 
Children were being used inappropriately for electioneering, and the election commission failed to present its calendar of activities, the organisation said. 
In one instance, the New Spirit party (FER) won a case against the PDK after its posters in the Malisheva area were covered with PDK material. The election panel for Complaints and Submissions (PZAP) ruled on the FER complaint on Tuesday and levied a 3,200-euro fine against the PDK. 
"FER is determined not to allow any violations to pass without being punished, not before, not during the elections … and especially violations that directly influence a change of the result of the elections," FER's Shpend Ahmeti said. 
According to polls, the PDK is in the lead with 30.2% of the vote. The LDK trails with 28.1%. The most preferred leaders are Isa Mustafa of the LDK, followed by Hashim Thaci of the PDK and Albin Kurti of Vetevendosje. 
