01/05/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 01/05/12
After Sunday's (May 6th) elections, more women are expected to take seats in parliament than previously after a push by the country to meet European standards. 
The 2008 elections were held according to different regulations, with parties and coalitions required to have at least 30% of female candidates on their election tickets. The result increased the number of women MPs to about 22%, or 55 seats in the 250-member parliament. 
The new regulations now bind parties and coalitions to have 33% of women on the election tickets -- which should result in more women in parliament. 
In Sunday's elections, the two parties being given the strongest chances of forming a government -- the Serbian Progressive Party and the Democratic Party -- have announced they will most likely nominate a woman for the post of prime minister. 
The Democratic Party has not yet unveiled its candidate, but the Serbian Progressive Party has officially announced that if it comes to power, the prime minister will be party senior official Jorgovanka Tabakovic. 
Compared to other countries in the region, Serbia seems to be on par in this regard. While Montenegro has just 11% of women in parliament, Croatia has about 21%. 
Snezana Lakicevic, chairwoman of the Serbian government's Gender Equality Council, said the country should aim for an average of 40% of women in parliament. 
"Over the past four years, we have done a great deal to provide a better position for women in Serbia's political life. I hope that the new regulations and greater presence of women on election tickets will additionally boost women's influence," Lakicevic told SETimes. 
However, she also thinks women should be given more opportunities in executive power in the government and local administrations. 
Serbia currently has one female deputy prime minister and several women at the posts of state secretaries. Prior to the reshuffling of the current cabinet last year, women also headed the ministries of telecommunications, investment and youth and sports. 
"The law does not regulate how many women should be in executive bodies. There is a recommendation for as much female inclusion as possible, and I hope that recommendation will become practice," Lakicevic said. 
Petar Petkovic, spokesman of the opposition Democratic Party of Serbia, claims that his party gives women significant influence in it. 
"In a country where no citizen is doing well, women cannot do well either. All the current government is boasting about in the field of gender equality are the results achieved by the government led by Democratic Party of Serbia president Vojislav Kostunica until 2008," Petkovic told SETimes. 
Serbia has a reputation of being a patriarchal society, but many men would gladly give women a chance in politics. 
"We men haven't proven to be particularly successful in running this state, maybe women really should be placed at the helm," graphic designer Marko Radovic, 34, told SETimes. 
