12/05/2005
(One World - 21/04/05; Humanitarian Law Centre - 20/04/05)
Three research and documentation centres from Serbia-Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croatia are planning to set up a permanent regional summer school. The aim of the unique project is to facilitate the process of dealing with the legacies of the 1990s Balkan conflicts. 
"It is our hope that this school will become a regional hotbed of analytical inquiry into the aspects and mechanisms enabling the successful development of the process of dealing with the past," the Belgrade-based Humanitarian Law Centre (HLC) said in a statement on 20 April, announcing the new initiative. 
The project is one of the results of co-operation between the HLC, the Sarajevo-based Research and Documentation Centre (IDC) and the Zagreb-based Documenta -- Centre for Dealing with the Past. 
Coping with the legacies of the conflicts that took place in the 1990s is the common denominator of the three NGOs. Although they use different methodologies, they all share the view that the establishment of truth, as a precondition of all forms of justice, requires a persistent search for facts. 
Under the protocol that HLC, IDC and Documenta signed in April 2004, they agreed to co-operate and co-ordinate their efforts in documenting and revealing the truth about the conflicts in the 1990s, ending impunity for past violations of humanitarian law, and bringing justice to victims. The main activities envisioned in the agreement include the creation of compatible war crimes databases, monitoring of regional war crimes trials, providing documentation to prosecutors, and legal support to victims and witnesses of war crimes. 
"We believe that finding out the truth, bringing justice and changing attitudes towards the victims of war crimes is a prerequisite for overall progress and the democratisation of societies in the region," a February HLC newsletter quoted the organisation's executive director, Natasa Kandic, as saying. 
According to IDC head Mirsad Tokaca, the months of co-operation proved that "the documentation of war events, in particular war crimes and serious violations of international humanitarian law, in the post-Yugoslav countries" was an important prerequisite for lasting peace. 
During a presentation of the co-operation project in March, Documenta director Vesna Terselic said a lot of people become uneasy when it comes to acknowledging responsibility for a specific crime. 
"First of all the suspects and perpetrators, but also those who are expected to accept political and institutional responsibility, because the crimes that have been committed are not just acts of will of unorganised units, but they were committed under the auspices of certain ideologies and military formations ... It seems to me very important to determine what dealing with the past really means in the educational system of our respective countries, what is in our history textbooks, and how much factual truth can be found in them instead of rather dubious interpretations we most often find there," Terselic said. 
As part of their new project, dubbed Summer School for Dealing with the Past, the three NGOs are organising one-week programmes for university students and NGO activists from the three countries. The courses will include lectures, presentations and discussions on a number of topics, such as retributive and restorative justice, truth-telling mechanisms, collective memory, reconciliation, international criminal law and the UN war crimes tribunal, and domestic war crimes trials. Eminent international and regional experts working in the field of transitional justice and dealing with the past will deliver the lectures and presentations. 
