02/07/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 02/07/09
Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader resigned abruptly on Wednesday (July 1st) for what he said were personal reasons. He named his deputy, Jadranka Kosor, as his successor, opening the door for Croatia's first woman prime minister. 
According to unofficial sources, senior Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) official Andrija Hebrang was offered Sanader's slot as presidential candidate in next year's election, and accepted. 
"I am leaving politics, but politics will always be a part of me. I am resigning for personal reasons and I would like to end any speculation by saying it was my own decision and that it is final," Sanader said at a press conference after the announcement. 
He denied that he had health problems and said he was not considering a position at a European institution, even though he had received such offers. "After 20 years in politics, ten in the HDZ and six in the government, it is time [to turn] a new page," he said. "I have done my part, now it is time for others. That is a rule of politics and life." 
HDZ party members said the news came as a surprise. Croatian President Stipe Mesic, who spoke with Sanader on Wednesday, also said it was unexpected. 
 "I'm surprised by Sanader's timing, as Croatia is experiencing a difficult economic situation and EU entry negotiations are blocked by Slovenia. In such circumstances, a government crisis will not help in stabilising the country," Mesic said. 
According to the daily Jutarnji List, the new government headed by Kosor may be put to a vote by parliament as early as Friday. 
"The government will continue the tasks that have been scheduled previously," she said. Local media reported that between 80 and 88 members of parliament have pledged to support her nomination. 
The leading opposition Social Democrats, led by Zoran Milanovic, have called for early elections in light of Sander's resignation. 
The public is unhappy with his decision, and some say they feel betrayed. "We did not expect this. Everything remains so unclear now," Tomislava Peric, 43, told Southeast European Times. 
Speculation swirls as to what sparked Sanader's move. Some allege turmoil within the HDZ, while others suggest he does not want to be held accountable for the country's economic downturn. At his press conference, however, he denied that he is "running from problems". 
If that were the case, he said, he would not have undertaken the HDZ leadership in the first place, nor run in successive local and national elections. 
Sanader, who joined the HDZ from its beginning in the 1990s, has been a powerful and prominent politician. He managed to reform the party after the death of its first president, Franjo Tudjman. In office since 2003, Sanader was considered a highly ambitious conservative democrat who led the country to NATO membership this year, and made steady progress towards EU membership. 
Bozidar Pankretic, agriculture minister and member of the Croatian Peasant's Party will assume the post of deputy prime minister left vacant by Kosor. 
