11/05/2011
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 11/05/11
The government will enable Macedonia's diaspora to exercise the right to vote in the parliamentary elections scheduled for June 5th without having to be physically present in the country. 
Three new electoral units were added to the existing six -- covering North and Latin America; Europe; and Australia, New Zealand and Asia proper -- and three parliamentarians representing the diaspora will be added to the existing 120. 
"This will positively affect Macedonia's statehood and development because there are nearly as many Macedonian citizens abroad as there are in the republic, excluding the Macedonians coming from the neighbouring countries. They send arrears roughly in the amount of Macedonia's budget and are a guarantor of the country's economic stability," World Macedonian Congress President Todor Petrov told SETimes. 
Petrov expressed hope that this election would be a "transitional phase", which will ultimately lead to an even more equitable diaspora representation. 
Over 1m euros of the 7m euros the State Election Commission (SEC) requested from the government to cover the election costs will be allocated to ensure citizens abroad vote. 
According to the election rules, if 2% of the registered voters turn out and vote for a particular candidate -- a virtual certainty -- the elections are considered valid. The winner will be decided by a majority vote. 
Officials have sought to relieve concerns about whether the 50 embassies and consulates where the voting will take place can accommodate the number of voters. There are four diplomatic-consular facilities in Washington, Chicago, Detroit and New York -- places where over 80% of the diaspora resides. 
"While we do not anticipate the need, we do have the physical space to open up to three additional voting polls," Macedonian Ambassador to the US Zoran Jolevski told SETimes. 
The primary concern, however, is to make the process transparent and publicise the elections as widely as possible. 
"We advertised in the New York Times as well as through Macedonian radio stations in the US, have made available the procedures for registration on a set of official websites -- including graphic presentations -- and opened toll free numbers to ease the process for the voters," Jolevski said. 
Among other concerns, Detroit-based American-Macedonian Association President Misko Vasovski told SETimes that the legal provision for collecting signatures has created difficulties, including for his own candidacy. 
Potential candidates must first provide evidence of a petition of support from 1,000 voters and present it to the embassy or consulate for verification. 
"It is good that emigrants are entitled to participate in the elections, but the practice will show the existing regulation should change because the nomination procedures are complex," he said. 
He recommended the model already used by Croatia, which makes it "easier for signatures to be deposited at the émigré clubs and for the SEC to check them later". 
SEC Deputy Chairman Subhi Jakupi said that thus far 70,000 citizens who temporarily reside abroad have registered to vote. 
