07/04/2006
(Nine O'clock, Makfax, Bulgarian Government - 06/04/06; AP, DTT-NET, EUROPA, Rompres, FENA - 05/04/06; Reuters, EUpolitix - 03/04/06)
At a summit in Bucharest, the prime ministers of eight Southeast European countries agreed on Thursday (6 April) to establish a single free trade zone by expanding and modernising the existing Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA). By the end of the year, the process is expected to lead to the conclusion of a single Regional Trade Agreement (RTA), which would replace a myriad of bilateral free trade agreements between SEE countries. 
The summit was hosted by Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu, whose country holds the CEFTA chairmanship this year. He was joined by his Bulgarian and Croatian counterparts, Sergey Stanishev and Ivo Sanader, whose countries are the only other current CEFTA members. Bulgaria and Romania may exit the pact in early 2007, when they are scheduled to join the EU. 
The other prime ministers in attendance were Albania's Sali Berisha, Bosnia and Herzegovina's Adnan Terzic, Macedonia's Vlado Buckovski, Moldova's Vasile Tarlev, Montenegro's Milo Djukanovic and Serbia's Vojislav Kostunica. UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen represented Kosovo in the meeting, organised by Tariceanu and Erhard Busek, the special co-ordinator for the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe. 
The initiative is backed by the EU, which was represented in Bucharest by Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn and Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson. Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schuessel, whose country currently holds the rotating EU membership, also attended the summit. 
Since 2001, countries in the region have concluded 31 bilateral free trade agreements with each other. A single RTA would consolidate bilateral trade concessions in the existing accords, through which more than 90 per cent of trade in the region has been liberalised, including almost all trade in industrial products. 
In addition to extending the CEFTA to cover all countries in the region, the RTA would modernise it, by adding new provisions for harmonising rules and regulations, improving dispute settlement, trade in services and the protection of intellectual property. 
Trade within the region increased 33 per cent between 2001, when it totalled 2.7 billion euros, and 2004, when it reached 3.5 billion euros, according to European Commission figures. At the same time, trade with the rest of the world marked a 21 per cent growth -- from 30.2 billion euros in 2001 to 36.4 billion euros in 2004. 
Trade between the SEE countries and the EU increased from 52 billion euros in 2001 to 79.8 billion euros in 2005, marking a growth of 53 per cent. 
The RTA is expected to bolster trade in the region and to boost much-needed investment. 
"This initiative helps the countries to prepare for the economic co-operation that is an inherent part of EU membership," Rehn said ahead of Thursday's meeting. "It is also an excellent example of regional co-operation becoming reality, and it is also a good training ground for economic co-operation in preparation for EU membership." 
