18/05/2010
(DPA, Euronews, Washington Post, Wall Street Journal - 18/05/10; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, VOA, RFE/RL, Christian Science Monitor, Times Online - 17/05/10)
Iran agreed to transfer much of its low-enriched uranium abroad under a deal with Brazil and Turkey, signed in Tehran on Monday (May 17th). But the move was met with scepticism by EU, US and Russian officials, as Iran also vowed to keep its 20% enrichment programme in place -- in violation of UN Security Council resolutions. 
Under Monday's agreement, signed by the foreign ministers of the three countries, Iran is to ship 1,200kg of its low-enriched uranium to Turkey within a month. In return, no more than a year later, it will get 120kg of higher-grade nuclear fuel from a different foreign source to be used in a medical research reactor. 
The swap was announced following talks among Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, Brazilian counterpart Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, and Turkish Prime Minister Tayyip Erdogan, over Tehran's disputed nuclear programme. 
Monday's deal is based on an agreement brokered by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) last year, under which Iran was to send nearly 80% of its low-enriched uranium abroad for processing into nuclear fuel. In October, Tehran accepted in principle the proposed accord, but then backed off from it, despite warnings that it could face new UN sanctions. 
Iran's total stockpile of low-enriched uranium is believed to have grown from 1,500kg last autumn to an estimated 2,300kg today. 
The Washington-based Institute for Science and International Security's David Albright said the country's current stockpile is more than twice the amount needed to produce enough material for one bomb. 
Tehran's move four months ago to raise its enrichment goal to 20%, up from 3.5%, caused further concern among Western powers already worried about the true objectives of Iran's nuclear programme. 
"For us, now, there are no grounds anymore for new sanctions or measures," Turkish Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu told reporters in Tehran. "Iran will write a letter to the IAEA and we hope that the IAEA in Vienna will react quickly and positively so that there will be a result in a very short period of time." 
 But Western officials made clear they plan to continue working on new UN sanctions against Iran, saying the new pact did not go far enough. 
Maja Kocijancic, a spokeswoman for EU foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton, said Monday's deal appeared to be "a variant" of the one brokered by the IAEA last year. 
 "If Iran has now accepted the IAEA proposal, this is welcome but it does not solve the fundamental problem, which is that the international community has serious concerns about the peaceful intention of the Iran nuclear programme," the DPA quoted her as saying. 
"Iran's failure to engage seriously and provide reassurances about the programme and not respecting the resolutions that were adopted is the reason why we are still pursuing the sanctions resolution in the Security Council." 
The White House acknowledged the efforts made by Turkey and Brazil, two non-permanent members of the Security Council, but noted that the "vague" deal should now be communicated "clearly and authoritatively" to the IAEA. 
 "Given Iran's repeated failure to live up to its own commitments, and the need to address fundamental issues related to Iran's nuclear programme, the United States and the international community continue to have serious concerns," White House Press Secretary Robert Gibbs said. 
