03/12/2004
(Sofia News Agency -- 02/12/04; BTA - 01/12/04; AFP, Sofia Echo - 29/11/04; Sofia News Agency - 23/11/04; RFE/RL - 22/11/04; OSCE Web Site)
Weeks before Bulgaria hands over the one-year OSCE chairmanship to Slovenia, Sofia is hosting a two-day meeting of the foreign ministers of the 55-nation organisation. The 12th Ministerial Council meeting, opening Monday (6 December) is to be attended by more than 1,500 officials, representatives of NGOs and journalists from around the world. 
Special security measures are being put in place for the event, including traffic restrictions along several key roads around the National Palace of Culture, which will host the plenary sessions and other related meetings. Police officials have said that a MiG-29 jet and a helicopter will patrol over Sofia, while 52 patrol cars will secure the capital's streets. 
The Ministerial Council, comprising the foreign affairs ministers of the 55 participating countries from Europe and Central Asia, is the main governing body of the world's largest regional security and co-operation organisation. It meets annually, except in years when the leaders of the participating states hold a Summit Conference, which happens once every two or three years. The United States and Canada are also OSCE members. 
According to Bulgarian Foreign Minister Solomon Passy, who has been serving as OSCE Chairman-in-Office (CiO) since 1 January 2004, the Sofia meeting will focus on a range of issues covering policy and operational areas, including a question asked by Passy in his welcome note: "What is the most effective response to … threats such as terrorism, organised crime and trafficking in human beings, small arms and drugs?" 
More than 30 years after its predecessor, the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), was established in 1972, the organisation is considering what structural changes it must make to ensure maximum operational flexibility. The forum is also expected to discuss how well current OSCE priorities correspond to the actual needs of the member states and how to ensure that the organisation remains relevant for the whole OSCE area. 
"The chairman-in-office, Solomon Passy, has put forward a number of reform proposals of his own," OSCE spokesman Richard Murphy told Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty ahead of the Sofia meeting. "These include shifting resources from the Balkans to the Caucasus and Central Asia [and] perhaps moving some meetings which [now] take place in cities such as Vienna or Prague [and] further east -- to the eastern parts of the OSCE area." 
Murphy said he expects some of the former Soviet republics in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) to come up with organisational reform proposals as well. "We have not seen great detail yet but I don't doubt that this will be very much on the agenda in Sofia," he said. 
Dutch Foreign Minister Bernard Bot, the previous CiO, is among the foreign ministers expected in Sofia. Others include Slovene Foreign Minister Ivo Vajgl, US Secretary of State Colin Powell and Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov. 
Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov will open the OSCE's 12th Ministerial Council meeting. Prime Minister Simeon Saxe-Coburg and Passy are also scheduled to address the participants Monday. 
During his last visit to Sofia before handing over his post to Condoleezza Rice, Powell will be decorated with Bulgaria's highest state order, "Stara Planina", for his outstanding contribution to the development of US-Bulgarian ties and in connection with the centenary of the two countries' diplomatic relations. 
