02/12/2005
(UN, Cyprus News Agency, Xinhua - 01/12/05) 
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan has recommended that the mandate of the UN peacekeeping mission in Cyprus (UNFICYP) be extended until mid-June next year. While the situation on the ground is calm, there has been "negligible" progress towards a political solution to the Cyprus problem, he said in a report to the Security Council. 
 UNFICYP was established in 1964 following clashes between the Greek Cypriot and Turkish Cypriot communities the previous year. After Turkey's invasion of northern Cyprus in 1974, the mission's mandate was expanded. Today, UNFICYP comprises an 841-strong military component and a 69-strong police component. 
The island has remained divided into an internationally recognised Greek Cypriot south and a Turkish Cypriot north, recognised by Ankara only. UN peacekeepers patrol the 180km-long buffer zone that separates the two communities. 
 "I continue to believe that only the achievement of a comprehensive settlement will bring an end to the Cyprus problem,"Annan said in his report. "In the absence of such a comprehensive settlement, the presence of UNFICYP on the island continues to be necessary." 
The military situation on the ground has been "generally calm," with the opposing forces showing co-operation and restraint, Annan said. There were 341 incidents between May and September this year, compared to 440 during the same period last year. However, he added, four of those that occurred during the reporting period were of "significant concern". 
"UNFICYP continued to enjoy generally good co-operation from both sides, but at the same time each side made attempts to alter the status quo to its advantage, whether in the form of new construction or incursions of personnel into the buffer zone," said Annan. 
According to his report, opportunities for contacts between the two communities have further improved with the opening of additional crossing points, which have also led to increases in trade. 
"The movement of people and trade across the buffer zone continued with approximately 9 million crossings of Greek Cypriots to the north and Turkish Cypriots to the south since the opening of the crossing points in early 2003," Annan said. "Goods worth about 1m Cyprus pounds (about $2m) crossed the Green Line from the north to the south, and 127,000 Cyprus pounds' (approximately $250,000) worth of goods crossed from the south to the north during the same period." 
 According to Annan, stronger efforts to resolve the issue of missing persons would contribute significantly to reconciliation between the two communities. 
 "I would therefore urge all concerned to redouble their efforts and put aside political considerations in order to close this painful humanitarian chapter and to end the suffering of the relatives of missing persons," he said. 
Annan noted he does not believe the time is ripe for the relaunch of peace talks. "While calls have come from all concerned for the resumption of negotiations, it appears that the conditions surrounding such a resumption necessitate further clarifications," he said. 
