16/09/2008
(AP, Reuters, AFP, AKI, BBC, UN News Centre, B92, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - 15/09/08)
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) sentenced on Monday (September 15th) a former Bosnian Muslim army chief to three years in prison for allowing the torture of Bosnian Serbs during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
A majority of the three-judge panel found retired General Rasim Delic, 59, guilty of failing to prevent and punish cruelties committed by Islamic foreign fighters under his command. 
Delic became commander of the Main Staff of the Army of BiH (ARBiH) in June 1993. Later that year, he established the so-called El Mujahed detachment, containing fighters from Islamic countries, including Afghanistan, who flocked to BiH to help the Bosnian Muslim forces. By the end of the year, the unit was integrated into the ARBiH. 
The court held Delic responsible for crimes by the El Mujahed detachment in the village of Livade and the Kamenica camp in central BiH in July and August 1995, when 12 captured Bosnian Serb soldiers endured different kinds of torture. 
"Some [Kamenica prisoners] received electrical shocks, and others suffered terrible pain through the use of high-pressure air hoses that were attached to their legs," the indictment alleged. It also referred to a case in which all captives were forced to kiss the severed head of another detainee. 
UN prosecutors claimed that Delic was aware that El Mujahed fighters had a propensity to commit crimes but failed to prevent them from taking place or to punish the perpetrators. 
The former Bosnian Muslim commander won acquittal on three other counts of murder and cruel treatment in connection with several separate incidents between 1993 and 1995. 
 UN prosecutors had sought a 15-year prison sentence for Delic, who is the most senior Bosnian Muslim officer the ICTY has convicted thus far. The defence argued he lacked effective control of the Islamic foreign fighters. 
The trial began in July 2007, about 29 months after Delic surrendered to the ICTY in late February 2005. He has already spent 488 days in custody, which the court will subtract from his sentence. 
Both Bosnian Croats and Serbs criticised the verdict by the ICTY, which they accuse of harbouring a bias against them. 
The ruling is a "flagrant violation of international law and an example of double standards in the judiciary," the AP quoted Rajko Kuzmanovic, president of Republika Srpska, as saying. 
