20/05/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 20/05/05
Construction of the second stretch of a road round Skopje will start at the end of the summer, authorities have announced. The Greek company Terna was selected as the contractor in an international tender held on 11 May. The road, a 26.2km long, 27.5m wide, four-lane highway circling the capital, is part of the East-West Corridor 8 project connecting the Bulgarian Black Sea coast to Albania and the Adriatic. 
Corridor 8 is a priority for the Macedonian government, according to Economy Minister Fatmir Besimi. During the March Southeast European Summit in Skopje, Stability Pact co-ordinator Erhard Busek urged countries in the region to accelerate construction. Other summit participants echoed his words, saying that conditions for a better business climate would be created if the region develops the infrastructure. A railway line, a gas system, long-distance power line and an oil pipeline are planned as part of the corridor. 
The ring-road project has the designation A/0, meaning that it is of significant environmental importance. The road will reduce traffic in the area, easing congestion and pollution. Currently, large trucks and other transitory traffic move through the Skopje city centre, creating traffic jams throughout much of the day. The new road will redirect this traffic around the city centre. 
The highway will be constructed north of Skopje and will connect the Skopje-Veles highway -- part of the North-South Corridor 10 -- with the Skopje-Tetovo highway (East-West). Construction of a new highway leading from the new road to Kosovo is also planned. 
The estimated cost of the project is 130m euros. The first stretch was funded by the European Investment Bank, and the second by the EBRD and European Investment Bank. The second stretch will cost about 50m euros. Several Greek companies, an Austrian company, a Greek-Italian consortium and three Macedonian companies in a joint bid applied for the international tender. The Macedonian companies -- Mavrovo, Pelagonija and Beton -- were not chosen due to their high bids. However, the local companies can take part in the project as subcontractors. 
The project study anticipates daily traffic of around 15,000 vehicles on the road by 2020, with a maximum speed of 120km. If everything goes according to the plan, the round-road will be completed by 2007. 
