20/06/2013
By Linda Karadaku for the Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 20/06/13
Kosovo and Slovenia signed an agreement on security co-operation in a move that experts lauded as a valuable contribution to Balkan stability. 
The agreement defines co-operation in training and education, legal issues and environmental issues. 
"The signed agreement opens a new page and establishes a new framework for our co-operation in the future," Ibrahim Shala, a spokesperson for the Ministry of the Kosovo Security Force, told SETimes. 
Shala said the agreement is particularly beneficial to Kosovo because it will gain Slovenia's assistance in the integration to NATO mechanisms. 
Quality relations with Western Balkan nations are in Slovenia's strategic interest and a priority for the country's defense and foreign policies, according to Slovenia's defence ministry. 
"We strongly believe integration of the Western Balkan countries into the Euro-Atlantic structures is essential for ensuring the region's long-term stability and prosperity. Slovenia will continue to take full responsibility for the region's security in the future as well," the Slovenian defence ministry told SETimes in a statement. 
"We also believe the agreement ... will enhance the co-operation between both parties," it added. 
Slovenia already provides advice and support to the Kosovo Security Force via the NATO Advisory Team where it holds two expert positions, and has a non-commissioned officer in KFOR's Military Civil Advisory Division, which mentors and assists the force. 
About 300 Slovenian troops are deployed in Kosovo as part of the NATO mission there, while 20 Slovenians work for EULEX. 
"Our engagement in KFOR remains … one of our operational priorities. We will maintain considerable and visible military presence within this NATO operation as long as necessary," the ministry added. 
The agreement will enhance Slovenia's existing contribution and will enable its defence ministry to establish annual programme of bilateral co-operation with the Kosovo Security Force. 
"The Slovenian experience, especially in civil emergencies and aviation, are important. These are the country's two most advanced experiences which can assist [the force] increase its capacity," Florian Qehaja, security analyst at the Kosovo Centre for Security Studies, told SETimes. 
Qehaja said Kosovo also finds the agreement beneficial because it can assert itself and contribute to international security. 
"This and other agreements help to further consolidate the existing mission of the [Kosovo Security Force] and open the doors to take an additional mandate as it becomes the future defence institution of the country," Qehaja said. 
Shala reiterated the latest agreement with Slovenia adds to the positive impact on stability that is being achieved by having signed similar agreements with the other Balkan countries. 
"We have signed co-operation agreements with all neighbouring countries except Serbia, and have good co-operation in all fields of mutual interest with all of them," Shala said. 
How important is co-operation between Kosovo and Slovenia toward regional stability? Share your opinions in the comments space.  
