22/10/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 22/10/04 
The Friedrich Ebert Foundation, a non-profit organisation based in Germany, recently conducted a study which found that corruption in Serbia's police has declined since 2000, but nevertheless remains a major problem. 
Researchers found that traditional types of corruption, such as bribery and fraud, are less widespread than political corruption -- that is, abuses arising from interference by politicians, parties and officials. Such abuses are far more dangerous than petty corruption, says the director of Serbia's Institute for Criminal Investigation, Dobrivoje Radovanovic. Top positions in the police are assigned to members of political parties, regardless of qualifications, he notes. And Serbian politics is rife with links to organised crime. As a result, police work is obstructed. 
According to Radovanovic, the assassination of Prime Minister Zoran Djindjic was a direct result of the nexus established between crime, politics and the police. 
"The police had everything ready for making arrests and preventing that assassination, especially after the several previous failed attempts," he says. "But they were always stopped by politicians, who kept saying 'wait a little, it's still not the time'." 
Police have also been faulted for their role in the EU sugar trafficking affair and in a scandal over trips by government ministers to the Athens Olympics, at public expense. In addition, political considerations are largely responsible for the continuing failure to arrest persons indicted for war crimes by the UN tribunal at The Hague, analysts say. 
However, Police Inspector General Vladimir Bozovic calls the allegations of widespread corruption "insufficient" and contrary to information uncovered so far. He also says action is being taken against corrupt officers. 
"A total of 27 criminal charges have been filed against 34 members of the police of different rank, with the crimes committed including embezzlement, accepting of bribes, illegal trafficking and, of course, falsification of documents, abuse of official position, corruption of administrative officials and fraud," according to Bozovic. 
Many say the problem will not be addressed fully until Serbia adopts comprehensive anti-corruption legislation, including laws on the origin of property and on free access to information. 
