27/04/2009
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb --27/04/09 
Croatians are worried about this summer's tourism season. The worldwide economic crisis is expected to take its toll on the industry, though estimates vary. The tourism ministry projects a decrease of around 3%, while independent economic experts fear it could be as high as 15%. Tourism is a vital sector, and the country could end up with up to 1 billion euros in lost revenue compared to 2007. 
These grim prospects have already sparked turmoil within the Croatian government. On April 9th, Tourism Minister Damir Bajs announced his resignation, saying he was disappointed with government efforts to keep the sector afloat. 
 Bajs, a member of a junior coalition member, the Croatian Peasant Party (HSS), had put forward a bailout package that would reduce the VAT rate in tourism from 22% to 10% this year. But the plan was rejected by the main ruling party, the Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ). 
An angered Bajs said he would leave his post. Following discussions with HSS head Josip Friscic, however, the minister has reversed his decision and now intends to stay on. 
A disappointing summer season would not only curtail revenues but could lead to spikes in unemployment. The jobless rate hovered around 15.2% in March -- an increase of 1% from 2008. More than 267,000 people were registered with the Croatian Employment Office (HZZ) -- 1.7% more than in February 2009 and 4.6% more than March of last year. 
According to Ankica Paun Jarallah, directors of the Croatian Employment Office (HZZ), March is usually seen as a bellwether of things to come. The downturn does not bode well for the coming season. 
Tourism is not the only sector at risk. The biggest monthly rise in unemployment was recorded in the industrial sector (25%), followed by manufacturing. Construction saw an 11.4% increase, compared to 11% for the hospitality industry. The jobless rate is significantly higher for women than for men. 
The Croatian Employers' Organisation (HUP) warns that urgent measures must be co-ordinated at the national level to avoid worsening unemployment. In February, CroIndustrije -- a branch of the HUP group -- President Vladimir Ferdelji said that if nothing is done to stop the recession, by summer the country could see 150 lost jobs per day. 
HZZ statistics show that the unemployment rate has increased in every county in the country except Lika and Podravina. In those two areas, it decreased by a mere 0.2%. 
Croatian Trade Union Association President Ozren Matijasevic worries that the picture will continue to darken in the coming months because of what he claims are a lack of anti-recession measures. 
 Matijasevic, whose organisation represents around 50,000 union members, said the country needs a clear strategy to help tourism survive this season. 
 "If the summer season does not deliver the results we expect, it is still going to be up to the tourism and construction industry to boost the economy and make the way out of the crisis," says another labour representative, Independent Labour Union (NHS) leader Kresimir Sever. 
All the news is not grim, however. A survey conducted by the HZZ in January and February shows that employers plan to open more positions this year, Jarallah said. The survey estimates that 66,353 positions will become available. If all are filled, the unemployment rate will drop to 9.2%. 
About 45% of the jobs will be in the tourism industry -- receptionists, waiters, cooks and maids. Positions in forestry and agriculture, construction, economics, medicine and electrical engineering are also expected. 
Meanwhile, a countrywide job fair, held in 22 Croatian towns at the end of March, drew huge numbers of people, surpassing organisers' expectations. In Zagreb alone, thousands flocked to the event to learn more about employment trends. Employers received a record number of CV's and applications. 
