01/09/2005
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 09/01/05
The Macedonian government has decided to amend its laws on elections, in accordance with a recommendation made by OSCE/ODIHIR with regard to the fight against corruption. The most important changes concern the funding of political parties during campaigns. Parliament is expected to adopt the legislation by the end of the year, in advance of the general election planned for 2006. 
Under the amendments, parties will be obliged to maintain public accounts and release financial statements declaring their sources of funding along with the total amounts of money raised and spent. That information will then be listed on an Internet site set up by the National Election Commission (NEC). Donations from anonymous sources will be prohibited and the time limits for opening giro accounts for a campaign will be reduced. 
In a provision seen as especially significant, parties that use resources gained through illegal activities risk having their candidate lists annulled. 
Intensified proposed audits and inspections of the inflow and outflow of money to and from parties are of great importance in view of hampering corruption, experts believe. "We cannot overlook the fact that in only a month political parties in Macedonia spend dozens of millions of euros," said Zoran Jacev of Transparency Macedonia. "No party has come out publicly to announce its campaign budget let alone reveal the origin of their money." 
The amendments are intended to change that. Within 48 hours of candidate list confirmation (that is, at least 35 days before a vote takes place), parties will have to open their giro accounts and submit them to the NEC, which will then release the information on the Internet. Failure to comply with the deadline will mean the party must withdraw from the election in question. 
Besides being available on the NEC's Internet site, the financial information declared by parties will have to be submitted to parliament, as well as to the National Audit Office within 30 days after verification of the mandates won in an election. 
Under its operational programme for 2005, meanwhile, the National Auditor is expected for the first time to audit the accounts of the Social Democratic Union of Macedonia, VMRO-DPMNE, the Democratic Union for Integration and the Democratic Party of Albanians. The auditor will inspect these parties' overall financial and material operation for the past year. Particular attention will be paid to the campaign for the 2004 presidential election. The groups which funded last year's referendum on territorial organisation are also set to come under scrutiny. 
