28/03/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 28/03/11
Turkey is the world's 17th largest global economy, and has one of the fastest growth rates of any country. With consumer demand on the rise, businesses worldwide are seeking to find a niche in this important emerging market. Turkish companies, meanwhile, are finding more and more opportunities for export. 
Bilateral trade with the United States, however, has not kept pace with the trend. US goods represent only 5% of Turkey's imports. 
"To be honest, Turkey which managed to enlarge bilateral trade with Europe, didn't achieve the same goal with the United States," says Faruk Logoglu, a former ambassador to the United States. "The root of the problem is that there is lack of US investment in Turkey and vice versa." 
"We have been talking about this lack for many years, but there is still a lot of work to be done," he told SETimes. 
Rizanur Meral, chairman of the Turkish Confederation of Businessmen and Industrialists, explains that the Turkish and US business worlds "do not know each other well enough". 
New initiatives are, however, under way to jump start economic ties. Earlier this month, the Turkey-US Economic Partnership met in Washington for talks on the issue. The two sides pledged to double bilateral trade in five years. 
"We're making good progress in establishing a strategic economic relationship," said Selim Yenel, a deputy under secretary at the Turkish Foreign Ministry. 
Jose Fernandez, assistant secretary of state, headed the US delegation. He says that from 2009 to 2010, trade between the two countries increased by 37%. 
"We can and need to do more," Fernandez says. "We have enormous political will". 
Muhsin Kar, economy analyst at the Institute of Strategic Thinking, an Ankara-based think-tank, worries that relations overall could be harmed in the long run if the potential for trade is not developed. 
"We should focus on educating and encouraging Tuorkish companies right away," he told SETimes. Easing visa procedures for businesspeople and opening trade offices in US regions would be a good start, he added. 
"Our top officials should enhance their trips from Washington to other regions of America, along with business representatives," he said. 
Kaan Nazli, a specialist on Turkey and Southeast Europe at New York-based Medley Global Advisors, recalls that in 2002 the former Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit was accompanied by about 600 businessmen on a trip to the US. Now, he says, only a few are coming. 
"Political support for businessmen is not enough," he told SETimes. "Even if a few influential businessman managed to start businesses in Virginia, Georgia, later they left." 
According to Nazli, huge potential for co-operation exists in areas such as automobile production."To expand in America, Turkish investors need to show up in US neighbourhoods as well," he said. 
Meral, meanwhile, believes both sides should seek out opportunities for mutual benefit."Turkish companies must co-operate with their US counterparts in investing and doing business in third countries," he said. 
