06/03/2006
(DTT-NET - 05/03/06; VOA, Kathimerini - 04/03/06; AP, BBC, UN, VOA, B92 - 03/03/06; UNMIK - 02/03/06) 
The UN's special envoy for the Kosovo status talks, Martti Ahtisaari, said on Friday (3 March) that he does not expect the impending appointment of Lieutenant General Agim Ceku as the province's new prime minister to affect the negotiations process. 
Under pressure from his own party, the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi announced his resignation Wednesday. The next day, Ceku, 45, was officially nominated as his successor. 
The Serbian government immediately protested it, since Ceku -- currently head of the Kosovo Protection Corps -- is a former commander of the Kosovo Liberation Army. Belgrade has accused Ceku of involvement in war crimes during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo and the 1991-1995 war in Croatia, when he fought on the side of the Croatian Army. 
Ahtisaari said the move was part of the normal political process and that he did not expect government changes to have "a dramatic effect" on the status talks. 
"Political parties have the right to organise their work as they like," the AP quoted him as saying. "I have no opinion, I don't need to have one. My task is to deal with the government that happens to be there and make the best out of that." 
But Belgrade insists that Ceku's appointment could damage the negotiations process, which opened with a meeting in Vienna last month. Serbia-Montenegro authorities have urged UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen to exercise his powers and block the nomination. 
Jessen-Petersen has indicated that he is not planning to take steps in that direction. 
"He has a lot of credentials, and I already know from many talks with him that he will focus a lot on the minority issues," the Voice of America quoted him as saying. "So, they [the Serbian government] may not like it today. But they will like what they see in a month or two." 
Jessen-Petersen and Ceku met on Thursday to discuss the political situation in Kosovo. "We had a good and useful discussion," a UNMIK statement quoted Jessen-Petersen as saying after the meeting. 
The next round of Kosovo status talks is scheduled for 17 March in Vienna, when decentralisation will again be among the issues the Serbian and Kosovo Albanian officials will discuss. 
"Apart from decentralisation, we will run parallel discussions on cultural and religious heritage, minority rights and economy," Ahtisaari has said. 
He has also asked Belgrade to encourage the Kosovo Serb leaders to participate in the province's institutions, stressing during a visit to the province last week that if they continue to avoid politics in Kosovo, "it will be very difficult for any administration to create conditions where people can live together."
