16/09/2004
By George Anagnostopoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens – 16/09/04
One in three Greeks now uses Internet services, and at least one in two uses personal computers, according to a study conducted by Focus WebID from February to March. Researchers found a steady but incremental rise in Internet activity, with 32 per cent of Greeks between the ages of 13 and 70 now using the web. Among young people and those at high educational and socioeconomic levels, the rate exceeds 50 per cent. 
Computers in general are used by 45 per cent of the population between 13 and 70, and by as many as 70 per cent of young people, the highly educated and well off. The new research confirms previous findings that showed a gradual upward movement and predicted that Internet penetration in Greece would surpass 35 per cent during 2004. 
The study also confirms the frequently cited distinction between the highly educated and affluent north, and the lower-income, more rural south -- a split reflected in Internet use trends. Moreover, although Internet use is growing, it is doing so at a significantly slower pace than elsewhere in Europe. While Greeks are pioneers in terms of mobile phone and television usage, they rank behind other European countries in terms of textual media, which tend to predominate on the web. 
Research also shows that Internet use remains primarily associated with offices and educational institutions, in large part because home computer use remains limited. A dramatic decrease in web surfing occurs during weekends and evenings. Peak times are between morning and noon. 
According to Web analysts, the Greek portal in.gr is the single most popular site in the country with an average of 208,000 daily visitors and a total audience of around 950,000. Next in the rankings is Google, followed by Hotmail, MSN and Greece's OTEnet and Flash-gr. The relative scarcity of Greek-based sites in the top rankings suggests the content market also lags behind the European norm. 
