01/03/2012
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 01/03/12
Croatian farmers and cattle breeders have ended a 15-day protest against the nation's primary milk producer over dairy prices, in a dispute that has raised awareness of the nation's agricultural problems as it prepares to join the EU next year. 
Hundreds of protesters began to withdraw from the country's main roads on Wednesday (February 29th). However, despite the government's satisfaction that the protests have ended, farmers said that the struggle over the price of milk has not ended. 
"From the road we are going directly to the office where we are going to prepare a legal document on the situation with our attorneys. We will give this document to the minister of agriculture. This is the struggle of ordinary people and Croatian peasants against large corporations -- you can be assured that we will not give up," Igor Resetar, president of the Croatian Association of Milk Producers (HSUPM) told SETimes. 
The protests, which began on February 14th, were prompted by the Dukat Dairy Company's decision in late January to pay its contracted farmers 0.3 euros per kilogram of milk -- a drop of 0.05 euros from the previous price. Demonstrators accused Dukat of ending an agreement that had brought milk prices in line with the EU average. Croatia is to become the 28th member of the EU next July. 
According to the Croatian Ministry of Agriculture, the current state subsidy for a litre of milk is 0.12 euros. 
Farmers are insisting that the government increase its subsidies to 0.05 euros per litre, otherwise, they say, more than 30% of the farms that produce milk in Croatia will disappear. 
Resetar said that nearly one-third of the farms will shut because farmers simply will not have the money to produce milk. 
At the height of the protests, farmers blocked several throughways with their tractors, and spilled hundreds of liters of milk in front of the main state institutions in Zagreb. 
The agriculture ministry said the farmers' demands are unreasonable. 
"When it comes to farmer requirements to increase state subsidies, it definitely will not happen," ministry spokesperson Nikolina Marenic told SETimes. 
She explained that the 0.05 euro per liter of milk was given to the farmers last year from the budget provided for emergency situations, but that this year the ministry doesn't have the funds. 
Some milk producers have accepted new prices and signed an agreement with Dukat and other dairy factories on February 23rd, but HUSPM -- which represents more than 85% of the milk producers in the country -- refused. 
Trade association Croatiastocar called on milk farmers to accept the agreement and to continue improving production efficiency. 
Croatiastocar -- which represents eight dairy companies, including Meggle, Dukat, Vindija, Ledo and Zdenka -- said it is against HSUPM leadership proposals to stop milk delivery or block dairy factories and roads. 
Dukat officials declined to comment. 
Goran Znidaric, a farmer from Varazdin, told SETimes that he is disappointed about how milk producers are treated. 
"An authority that beats its own peasants can't expect any good. The ministry and the government seems to want to protect big corporations and not us, the producer. They do not realise that we will not be able to produce milk anymore," Znidaric said. 
