30/07/2009
(AFP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, Beta, B92, Makfax, UN News Centre, International Court of Justice - 29/07/09)
The public hearings on the legality of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence will open on December 1st, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) announced on Wednesday (July 29th). 
Those wishing to participate in them must inform the court by September 15th. 
The UN and its member states, as well as the "authors" of Kosovo's independence declaration, will then be able to present their statements and comments on the issue during the public hearings at the court's headquarters in The Hague. 
On October 8th 2008, the General Assembly approved a Serbian resolution asking the ICJ to render an advisory opinion on whether Kosovo's unilateral move was in accordance with international law. The issue was filed with the UN top judicial organ, known also as the World Court, two days later. 
Kosovo authorities, the UN and member states were given until April 17th to submit their written statements on the case. According to the ICJ's statement Wednesday, the Czech Republic was the first to do that. Thirty-five other UN member states followed suit. 
Albania and Romania were the only Balkan countries, aside from Kosovo and Serbia, to submit statements. 
 Media reports in April said UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon submitted a 2,900-page dossier with documents and other materials on the matter, some dating back to March 1998. 
The ICJ set July 17th as the deadline by which the UN, its member states and Kosovo should file any comments they had on each others' submissions. 
Kosovo and 14 of the 36 countries have submitted comments. 
Kosovo declared independence from Serbia on February 17th 2008 and has thus far been recognised by 60 countries, including 22 of the EU's 27 member states, Australia, Canada, Japan and the United States. Bosnia and Herzegovina is the only former Yugoslav republic, aside from Serbia, that has not done so. 
Belgrade maintains that Kosovo is an integral part of Serbia. In a recent interview for the BBC Radio 4's The World Tonight show, Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic said he wants to negotiate with Pristina authorities, vowing to be "very flexible". His remarks also suggested a possible shift in Belgrade's position. 
Asked whether he might recognise Kosovo should some of its land be returned to Serbia, Jeremic said "We don't want to exclude any options. We need to come to the table and see what happens." 
As all other advisory opinions rendered by the ICJ, its ruling on the Kosovo issue will have no binding effect. Therefore, none of the countries that have recognised the young country so far will be obliged to reverse their decisions, even if the UN judges determine its independence declaration was not in accordance with international law. 
