14/12/2004
(Various sources -- 14/12/04 - 13/12/04)
Romanian President-elect Traian Basescu pledged on Monday (13 December) to fight corruption in his country and to keep it on track to join the EU in 2007. The leader of the opposition centrist alliance between the National Liberal Party (PNL) and the Democratic Party won a surprise victory in Sunday's presidential runoff, defeating outgoing Prime Minister Adrian Nastase in the race to succeed Ion Iliescu. 
Final results released Monday by the Central Electoral Bureau show Basescu won 51.23 per cent of the vote, while Nastase, of the alliance between the ruling Social Democratic Party and the Romanian Humanist Party (PUR), won 48.77 per cent. 
"Corruption is a very serious problem," the AFP quoted Basescu as saying in a victory speech Monday. "As head of the country's supreme Defence Council, I will tackle this scourge head-on because it is a real threat to the country." 
Outlining his priorities, the pro-reform leader also vowed to fight poverty and to free state institutions -- especially the judiciary -- from political interference. He has also proposed a 16 per cent flat profit and income tax to encourage investment and bring the country's sizeable grey economy out of the dark. 
Nastase conceded defeat Monday. "I respect the results as published by the Central Electoral Office, which show the will of the Romanian people," he said, adding that his party would support Basescu's efforts to keep the country on track in meeting its EU entry goal. 
Both PUR and the Democratic Alliance of Hungarians in Romania made statements Monday suggesting they could join a government coalition. Under the constitution, in a situation when none of the parties has a majority, the president is free to designate a prime minister, who must then be approved by parliament. Basescu said Monday he would appoint PNL chairman Calin Popescu Tariceanu as prime minister. 
"Today my priority is to form, as soon as possible, a government capable of continuing membership negotiations for Romania to join the EU," Basescu said at a press conference. "EU membership must also be won in Romania as it is here that we must succeed in living up to the necessary standards." 
Romania completed its EU membership talks last week. Some of the measures it has agreed to implement ahead of its planned 2007 EU entry include tackling corruption, slashing state subsidies to the steel sector, reforming the judiciary and tightening border controls. 
In related news, the ODIHR mission, which monitored the runoff, said conduct of the vote was generally satisfactory. At a news conference Monday, mission head Stephen Nash noted that administrative problems registered in the first round -- such as multiple voting -- were mostly addressed. Observers will release their final report in about one month. 
