25/09/2008
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 25/09/08
Macedonia's main opposition party, the Social Democratic Union (SDSM), held its 8th Party Congress last week. One of its major developments was the selection of an interim party head to replace Radmila Sekerinska, who presided over the SDSM's poor showing in the last elections. 
Zoran Zaev will hold the post of acting party chief until May 2009, when Macedonian President Branko Crvenkovski's term ends. Crvenkovski is expected to then take up the reins of the SDSM. 
"You gave me a major responsibility and a great honour to be able to trace the road in which the SDSM will be stronger and more modern in the future," Zaev said. "I will lead the party so that every day we will confirm our unity." 
Zaev, who received the support of 615 delegates at the congress, is the fourth SDSM leader since the party's founding. He was also at the centre of a political storm over the summer, when authorities detained him on charges of misappropriating 8m euros in public funds. The arrest led to an SDSM boycott of parliament. Crvenkovski eventually pardoned Zaev, the mayor of Strumica. 
Sekerinska, the former foreign minister who had hoped to become Macedonia's first female leader, said her party had become tied up in personal interests and had lost touch with its core. "We forgot and didn't attend to the ordinary citizen and his everyday problems in life," she said. 
She also insisted she had sought to keep the SDSM on solid ground. "I have entered into politics without calculations and with high honour. I am not giving that away," she said. 
Her successor has said he will now review the SDSM's relationship with its partners in the Sun coalition, especially at the local level. 
"The coalition will exist and will be sustained at the central level. I expect strengthened co-operation on this level. But this doesn't mean that the SDSM will enter a coalition with the same parties for the local elections. The local elections are specific, and the opinion of the local party organisations is very important," he said. 
