17/03/2006
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 17/03/06
Republika Srspka, the Bosnian Serb entity in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), is taking its first steps to bring war crimes suspects to justice, according to a report released by Human Rights Watch (HRW) on Thursday (16 March). However, sustaining the process requires commitment by local authorities and the backing of the international community, the rights watchdog cautioned. 
"For the first time since the end of the Bosnian war, victims may see some justice in RS," a press release quoted HRW Europe and Central Asia director Holly Cartner as saying. "But the challenges are huge. Without the political will to reform the justice system, terrible crimes will continue to go unpunished." 
The 42-page report notes the recent progress made in war crimes trials, while also describing the continuing obstacles to effective and fair prosecutions, such as limited resources and a lack of police assistance. 
At the end of last year, HRW says, war crimes prosecutions in RS gained momentum. Five Serbs were convicted on war crimes charges, following three trials held in district courts in Banja Luka and Trebinje. As of February 2006, a war crimes trial against an ethnic Serb was ongoing in the Trebinje district court, and another one involving a Serb defendant was under way in Banja Luka's district court. Prosecutors in charge of war crimes cases in several parts of RS were also nearing completion of other investigations, the report found. 
"The increase in the number of prosecutions reflects a greater willingness on the part of RS authorities to bring war crimes suspects to trial, as the result of the loosening grip of extreme nationalists on politics in the entity," HRW said. Following the establishment of the new Sarajevo War Crimes Chamber, around 40 cases have been transferred to RS prosecutors by the BiH chief prosecutor, it noted. 
Despite the new momentum towards prosecuting war crimes, a number of serious problems remain, according to HRW. These include lack of prosecutorial resources and inadequate investigative capacity in the face of an increasing caseload, a lack of expertise in humanitarian law, insufficient help from the RS police, witness intimidation, and non-availability of suspects. 
To ensure trials meet international standards, the Bosnian Serb entity should introduce professional investigators into district-level prosecutorial offices, increase the number of prosecutors when needed, make greater use of law clerks, and fully use available sources of information, including ICTY transcripts and information gathered by NGOs, the human rights organisation said. 
HRW's report on RS comes two months after the release of its World Report 2006, which covers the human rights situation in 53 countries across the globe. The report found that war crimes accountability and the return of persons displaced by the 1992-1995 conflict remained key issues in BiH. As for neighbouring Serbia-Montenegro, the World Report noted a degree of improvement in terms of co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal -- demonstrated by the transfer of three army and police generals -- while warning of a lack of judicial independence in both constituent republics and a marked deterioration in the treatment of human rights defenders in Serbia. 
