02/09/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 02/09/04
Bulgarian director Zornitsa Sophia’s first feature film, "Mila from Mars", won the Sarajevo Film Festival’s Heart of Sarajevo award on 28 August, and along with it, 25,000 euros in prize money -- the first time the festival has awarded such an amount to a winning director. 
The event has come a long way since its inception in 1995, when viewers saw 37 films in a city still under siege from Bosnian Serb units in the surrounding mountains. This year its 12 programmes showed more than 170 films to more than 100,000 viewers. Most screenings sold out well before the 20 August opening ceremony, which screened Bosnian Pjer Zalica’s latest film, "Kod amidze Idriza" (Days and Hours). 
Besides the nine regional films that competed for the 25,000-euro prize, five others were shown in a special programme intended to give exposure to more directors from the Balkans. 
Meanwhile, the "Tribute to" programme -- which has for the past nine years highlighted the best works of a foreign director or actor/director like American Steve Buscemi -- was shared this year by French director Gaspar Noe and ex-Yugoslav director Dusan Makavejev, whose sometimes racy films had been banned under the old Yugoslav regime in the 1970s. 
The regional documentaries programme also expanded this year to seven straight days of programming from four last year, with 16 films shown. Viewers responded most strongly to two documentaries from Croatia -- "Uvozne Vrane" (Imported Crows) and "Sretno Dijete" (Lucky Kid). 
The latter film, which documents the then-Yugoslav new wave music scene in the late 1970s and early 1980s, got a standing ovation at its sold-out screening in Sarajevo’s freshly repainted National Theatre. Director Igor Mirkovic tearfully told the audience that he hadn’t expected such appreciation. 
Mirkovic said he made the film in response to the fact that a lot of people in Croatia have tried to forget they were ever part of Yugoslavia, though by doing so they’ve put positive experiences -- like visiting various seaside spots and listening to home-grown bands in the early 1980s -- out of their minds as well. 
"I thought that maybe if they heard the music, they’d say, 'Oh yeah, I remember that song'," he said. 
Other highlights of this year’s Sarajevo Film Festival included added screenings of American director Michael Moore’s controversial film "Fahrenheit 9/11" and brief visits from American actor/director John Malkovich and French actor Gerard Depardieu, both of whom had films in the festival. 
Also briefly attending the film festival was Bosnian-born director Danis Tanovic, who has been credited for helping kick-start Bosnia and Herzegovina’s film industry with his black comedy about the 1992-1995 conflict, "No Man's Land", which won an Oscar for Best Foreign Film in 2001. 
"I think this is the biggest festival to date, and I think that it’s important that it stay on this level -- I don’t think that the structure of Sarajevo could handle something bigger than this," he told the Sarajevo daily Oslobodjenje. "The regional programme is a really important thing, especially for directors and people who work in film in this area. On the other hand, it’s really important that people have the chance to see the best documentary films that have appeared in the last year." 
