20/12/2007
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 20/12/07
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica and Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu both addressed a closed-door session of the UN Security Council Wednesday (December 19th), presenting sharply differing views about Kosovo's future status. 
The session, which ended without a formal declaration, demonstrated that the international community also remains split on the issue. 
Russia continues to side with Serbia, opposing independence and calling for further negotiations. According to Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic, Belgrade also sees support for its position from China, Indonesia and African members of the Security Council. 
The United States and most Western countries support supervised independence for Kosovo, while also arguing that further negotiations would be pointless since 18 months of talks have led nowhere. 
"The potential for a negotiated solution is now exhausted," Western representatives said in a joint statement. "The presentations by the two parties confirmed that their views remain irreconcilable on the fundamental question of sovereignty. It is clear in our view that more negotiations in this or any other format will not make any difference." 
Russia sharply disagreed, however, with Ambassador Vitaly Churkin insisting that the Security Council must give its approval in order for the EU to send a mission to Kosovo early next year, as planned. He also spoke against Kosovo independence, saying it could destabilise the region, and argued that there is still room for another round of negotiations. 
 Russia has a proposal that could lead to a breakthrough, he suggested. 
 In his presentation, Serbia's prime minister also warned the EU against sending a mission to Kosovo without Security Council approval. Serbia is ready to participate in new talks that lead to broad autonomy for Kosovo, making its primarily ethnic Albanian population "the most privileged ethnic minority in the world", Kostunica said. 
By contrast, he said, granting Kosovo independence would spur a chain reaction across the globe, with separatist movements elsewhere seeking to redraw borders and establish new states. 
 "For the first time in the UN's history, the debate is on whether the internationally recognised borders of UN member states are truly guaranteed and whether the principle of respecting sovereignty and territorial integrity is still universally applicable," he said. 
Kostunica's argument that a sovereign Kosovo would set a global precedent was rejected by Sejdiu. Kosovo represents a unique case, he told the Security Council, adding that the ethnic cleansing campaign carried out by Serbia in the 1990s has made it impossible for Kosovo Albanians to countenance any form of rule by Belgrade. 
With little hope now of the issue being settled by a UN Security Council resolution, EU representatives have signaled that they will move towards implementing supervised independence and establishing an 1,800-strong EU administrative, judicial, and police mission to replace the current UNMIK. 
Russia's insistence to the contrary, EU officials -- including Dutch Foreign Minister Maxime Verhagen -- say no new UN mandate is needed for the mission. 
