18/10/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 18/10/07
An Indian company signed a memorandum of understanding with the Serbian government on September 25th to build Serbia's first IT park, in what could potentially become Serbia's biggest greenfield investment. Bangalore-based property developer Embassy Group plans to build its first European technology park in the small city of Indjija, located halfway between Belgrade and Novi Sad. 
The park will initially span 280 hectares and employ 2,500 workers. The deal will potentially be worth up to 425m euros over five years, during which time the size of the park and the number of workers could be increased ten times. Expected profit of export from this park is about 2 billion euros a year. 
 "It is a very important project for us, because Serbian students who finish electro-technological faculty and technical sciences leave the country … to work in big international software companies. It is our duty to persuade these young people, who are so intelligent and diligent, to stay and work in Serbia," said Mladjen Dinkic, minister of economy and regional development. 
Embassy Group is one of the world's leading companies in building and development of IT and business parks. The companies' clients in the IT sector include IBM, Microsoft, HP, ANZ Information Technology, and Goldman Sachs. 
 "A lot of people are asking us why this Indian company came to Belgrade. It was a challenge for us. We have visited a lot of countries in Eastern Europe and sought a partner who can service the Eastern European market. We have concluded that Belgrade satisfies the needs of our clients, because of its future prospects and the good attitude the people have here," said Embassy Group General Director Jitu Virwani. 
The municipality of Indjija will donate the land on which the park will be built, and the state will finance the building of the infrastructure with funds from the national investment plan for 2008. 
But just a day after the signing of the memorandum, arguments began between the Minister for Informatics Technologies Aleksandra Smiljanic and the Municipality of Indjija Mayor Goran Jesic. Smiljanic said that the investment could harm the domestic technology sector and that her ministry wasn't consulted. Jesic countered by accusing Smiljanic of representing the interests of domestic lobbies. 
