26/04/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 26/04/10
Kosovo authorities disabled unlicensed telephone networks run by Serbian providers at the weekend, calling the action an effort to implement the law and "create the conditions for normal operation". 
Acting on the orders of the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (TRA), police cut cables and removed equipment belonging to the Serb providers Telekom Srbije, Telenor and VIP. The action started at 5am on Friday (April 23rd) and was concluded the following day. 
Many Kosovo Serbs are without landlines, and thus found themselves without any form of telephone communications. Thousands have reportedly been affected, although those living near the northern border could still get a signal from transmitters in Serbia. 
Meanwhile, Kosovo Post and Telecommunications began distributing free SIM cards and access numbers for the Kosovo Vala mobile operator in Gracanica and other Serb-inhabited areas. 
TRA Director Ekrem Hodza said his agency would monitor the situation and check to see if the illegal networks get reconnected. If that happens, he said, the TRA will disable them again. 
In a press release, the government said the action was legal and the shut-downs were not directed "against any ethnicity or particular state, but they are against all those operators which have not respected the legal norms in power". 
Belgrade, however, claims the move is part of an overall attempt by the Kosovo Albanian authorities to intimidate Serb communities. 
"The question of licenses for the providers from Serbia was initiated several times," said Serbia's State Secretary for Kosovo and Metohija, Oliver Ivanovic, adding that the mobile services still had the right to operate under licenses obtained prior to 1999. 
Kosovo Serbs staged a peaceful protest in Gracanica on Monday. According to Goran Arsic, a local Serb leader, "a clear message will be sent ... that Serbs will not accept blackmail." 
The disruption of mobile services is an "introduction for pressures later" as Pristina seeks to integrate schools, the health system and other services into state structures, Arsic said in comments quoted by B92 and Tanjug. 
Apparently in retaliation, a transmitter and antenna of the Kosovo mobile company IPKO were damaged in an apparent explosives blast during the night Friday. It happened in the northern village of Rudar I vogel, near Zvecan. 
On Sunday, a similar attack destroyed an IPKO transmitter near the northern town of Leposavic. Equipment belonging to the Vala mobile phone network was also damaged. 
KFOR issued a statement at the weekend expressing concern. 
"KFOR acknowledges that many mobile phone users are frustrated by the sudden disruption of services ... but strongly disapproves of any actions that could endanger the safe and secure environment, like the use of explosive devices." 
It also called on Kosovo institutions to "adopt a transparent approach when undertaking actions that have a significant impact on the daily lives of any part of the population in Kosovo, so that the people concerned can make the necessary arrangements in good time". 
