12/11/2007
By Sami Neza for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 12/11/07
Albanians are mostly ignoring a ban on smoking in public places because penalties are not being enforced, according to the organisation Smoke Free Albania. 
The law, which took effect in May, prohibits smoking in bars, restaurants, government offices and other public locations. In theory, Albania's anti-smoking legislation is among the strictest in Europe, but activists say implementation has been far from adequate. 
"People are fined, but the fines are not collected; there is no equality in the application of this law," said Xhovani Shyti of Smoke Free Albania."Some bars ban smoking, while others do not." 
One bar owner, who asked not to be identified, explained why he takes the risk of being fined. "If I ban smoking in my bar, I will lose clients and my business will fail," he said. 
Even at Tirana's luxurious Twin Towers – located only a few metres from the prime minister's office -- people smoke openly. The towers are home to numerous bars and restaurants. 
 In the past four months, the health ministry has inspected more than 5,000 locations and has issued 1,500 fines -- none of which has been collected. 
Edmond Stojku, a senior official at the ministry, says the problem is poor co-ordination between health inspectors and municipal police. 
 "We may fine violators, but we can't collect the fines," he explains. 
Albania has the highest smoking rate in Europe. According to national statistics, 40% of Albanians smoke regularly. The results of a poll last year of medical students at the University of Tirana revealed that by the fifth year, 90% were regular smokers. 
According to data provided by the health ministry, tobacco consumption increased after 1990. Before then, no more than 20% of Albanians smoked. The largest rise in tobacco consumption has occurred among youngsters and girls. 
The new legislation -- which also penalises media outlets that promote smoking -- has been more successful at deterring advertisements. These have largely been removed from newspapers, TV broadcasts and billboards. 
The penalties, however, do not appear to have significantly impacted the general public in a country where children can often be seen selling cigarettes in the streets. 
