18/09/2008
(International Herald Tribune - 18/09/08; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, AKI, BBC, VOA, Javno.hr, B92, SENSE News Agency, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - 17/09/08)
Prosecutors at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) confirmed on Wednesday (September 17th) they will submit a new indictment of former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic for UN judges' approval within days. 
"We expect to file the motion for a new indictment ... by Monday," prosecutor Alan Tieger said. "The hope is that it will be Friday of this week," he told Iain Bonomy, the presiding judge at Wednesday's hour-long status hearing. 
The latest amended 11-count indictment, dating back to 2000, charges Karadzic with a host of war crimes committed against non-Serbs during the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). He faces two counts of genocide stemming from the 44-month siege of Sarajevo and the 1995 Srebrenica massacre of up to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys. 
In his second court appearance on August 29th, Karadzic again refused to tender a plea. Judge Bonomy entered a not-guilty plea to each charge on his behalf. It remains unclear if the upcoming indictment will include any new charges. 
If judges approve the new indictment, they will call another plea hearing. 
 Karadzic insisted on Wednesday that he would conduct his own defence. But he also indicated that he is considering having a team of legal advisers to assist him during the trial. He does not plan to be "passive", he added, as he would not be defending just himself, but also the leaders of smaller states whom he claimed NATO would target after his trial. 
 "This either has to be a fair trial or no trial at all," the AP quoted Karadzic as saying. "I have to hold the reins of my defence in my own hands." 
The former Bosnian Serb leader used Wednesday's hearing to reassert his allegations of a secret deal he cut with former US envoy Richard Holbrooke in 1996, under which Holbrooke supposedly promised him immunity from ICTY prosecution if he disappeared from political life. 
After previously saying Holbrooke was representing Washington in the deal, Karadzic said on Wednesday that "Holbrooke did everything he did on behalf of the Contact Group and the Security Council." 
The former US envoy, who helped broker the 1995 Dayton Accords, flatly denies ever promising Karadzic that he would not face a UN war crimes trial. 
Karadzic told the court Wednesday that he is conducting a "comprehensive investigation" aimed at proving his assertions. Bonomy, though, said even if Karadzic proved them, they would have "no bearing" on the trial. 
