22/06/2013
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 22/06/13
Tensions are flaring in the Macedonian municipality of Struga after two months of failed local elections, but many said the source of conflict is political, not ethnic. 
The municipality council has not been established due to the demand from Macedonian parties that a Macedonian head the council, and the refusal of Albanian parties to accept. 
"The situation is more political than ethnic. We have excellent co-existence in Struga, and to all of us the progress of the municipality is the biggest interest. It is important to have people able to work and not to argue whether they are Albanian or Macedonian," Abdullah Kazimoski, a Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA) MP in Struga, told SETimes. 
"For years, we lived here and we never had conflicts with any nationality. Macedonians, Turks, Albanians, Roma, Vlachs live in Struga. Communication between people is good. But I am afraid politics are breaking this," Robert Spasenoski, 56, from Struga, told SETimes. 
Struga has a large Albanian population and has been the site of tension in the past. In the March local elections, the ruling VMRO-DPMNE and the opposition SDSM joined forces in a coalition. 
According to Blagoja Markovski, chairman of Balkan Security Forum, the situation could eventually affect Struga's security. 
"Coalitions have emerged in the elections, so the electorate is grouped by ethnicity. This led to internal political and ethnic games that caused stagnation of economic development of the municipality of Struga, but long term, the security situation becomes questionable," he told SETimes. 
But Macedonian officials disagree that the coalition was formed to divide along ethnic lines. 
"The coalition between VMRO-DPMNE and the SDSM should not be seen as purely ethnic because behind this coalition stood the other nationalities as Roma, Vlachs, Turks," former Kicevo Mayor Blagoja Despotovski told SETimes. 
Gjoko Iloski, president of VMRO-DPMNE in Struga and a member of the municipal council, said the solution to overcome the current situation is to hold discussions with Mayor Zijadin Sela from the Democratic Party of Albanians (DPA). 
The coalition said Sela is marginalising the Macedonians. 
"[It is] discrimination on ethnic grounds. Despite the fact that the Macedonians are almost two and a half times more than all ethnic communities in Struga, despite the fact that our coalition has the largest advisory group in the Council of Struga, unfortunately we have to conclude that the Macedonians in Struga can't participate in the creation of strategies for development and prosperity in their own city," councilman Djoko Iloski from VMRO-DPMNE told SETimes. 
The law on local self-government mandates that if within three months of the constitution of the council a president is not elected, new local elections must take place. 
Sela said he was ready to go to new local elections, but newly elected SDSM leader Zoran Zaev told SETimes that his party does not agree with holding new elections. 
"It's just wasted time, and there is no guarantee that the story will not be repeated. Chairman of the council should be Macedonian for balance of the leadership of the municipality. This is a picture of unnecessary spread of nationalism," Zaev said. 
The political spats are holding local government under captivity, and the city is stagnating economically, not receiving the required projects under jurisdiction of the municipality. 
"Vital projects, especially infrastructure, can't be realised without a decision of the municipal council and mayor. For Struga, as a resort [town], [it] is very important to start functioning as soon as possible," councilman Djoko Iloski from the VMRO-DPMNE, told SETimes. 
Is the problem in Struga political or ethnic? Tell us what you think in the comments below. 
