07/10/2010
(AFP, Reuters, BBC, Independent, Guardian - 07/10/10; AP, Reuters, DPA, Bloomberg, FT, BBC, CNN, RFE/RL, VOA, CTV, The Sofia Echo - 06/10/10)
A criminal investigation is under way in Hungary into the toxic sludge disaster caused by an industrial incident earlier this week. Although teams have been working round the clock to prevent the contamination from creeping into the Danube River, Europe's second-longest waterway, they lost that battle Thursday (October 7th) morning. 
This all began when the retaining walls of a huge waste reservoir at the Ajkai Timfoldgyar aluminum refinery outside the small town of Ajka, 160km southwest of Budapest, collapsed on Monday, sending a tide of toxic red slurry racing through several towns and villages. 
Shortly after the incident, Hungarian authorities declared a state of emergency in three counties and evacuated hundreds of people from the affected region as the fast-moving torrent, reaching 2m in places, flooded homes, swept away cars and damaged bridges. 
At least four people were killed, more than 120 were injured and three are missing. 
The Ajka incident, described by Greenpeace as "one of the top three environmental disasters in Europe in the last 20 or 30 years", was without precedent, according to Hungarian Environment Secretary Zoltan Illes. He said it will cost tens of millions of euros to clean up the mess. 
"The clean-up and reconstruction could take months, even a year," he said. MAL Magyar Aluminum, the owners of the refinery, have said that between 40% and 45% of the sludge that spilled on Monday is iron oxide, which explains the rusty red colour. It also contains aluminium oxide and silicon dioxide, at between 10% and 15% each, as well as smaller quantities of calcium oxide, titanium dioxide and oxygen-bonded sodium oxide. 
The incident prompted concerns among EU officials and the International Commission for the Protection of the Danube (ICPD). Now that the toxic waste has reached the river, it could affect six other countries -- Croatia, Serbia, Bulgaria, Romania, Moldova and Ukraine -- through which the Danube flows before emptying into the Black Sea. 
"We're concerned not just for the environment in Hungary, but this potentially crosses borders," the BBC quoted EU spokesman Joe Hennon as saying. ICPD Executive Secretary Philip Weller said that the possible spread of pollution into the Danube is unlikely to have a critical impact on the countries further downstream. He acknowledged, however, that it could eventually enter the food chain. 
"Heavy metals, once they are released into a water system, are then, over time, taken up by the aquatic plants that are then eaten by the fish, and then the materials build up in the food chain and do then have toxic consequences or health consequences for fish or potentially humans, who are eating them," he told Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. 
 In Sofia, environmental experts and officials appeared divided in their views about the potential risks to their country. 
Assen Lichev, a senior official at the Bulgarian environment and water management ministry, says there is "no risk of pollution" reaching his country's section of the Danube River. He and others sharing that view argue that by the time the contamination reaches that part of the river, it would be highly diluted. 
