07/05/2007
(Sofia Echo - 07/05/07; BTA, Sofia News Agency, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Focus news Agency, Netinfo, Bulgarian Government - 06/05/07; AFP - 05/05/07; Sofia News Agency - 04/05/07)
Bulgaria will not tolerate corruption in the political sphere, Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev said on Sunday (May 6th) amid a scandal involving several senior government officials. 
"We must give a clear political sign that no one can have a political umbrella in Bulgaria," he said after a 45-minute discussion with Prosecutor General Boris Velchev. 
The scandal erupted about two weeks ago, when the National Investigative Service (NIS) chief, Angel Alexandrov, dismissed Tatyana Sharlandjieva, the leading investigator in a money-laundering probe against the head of Sofia's central heating company, claiming she had been leaking information to "parties interested in the case". 
In followup statements, both accused each other of wrongdoing. Eventually, corruption allegations were leveled at others, including Economy and Energy Minister Rumen Ovcharov, his deputy, Kornelia Ninova, Deputy Minister for Disaster Management Delyan Peevski and Hristo Lachev, the head of Bulgaria's tobacco monopoly, Bulgartabac. 
All involved are linked either to the Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) or the Movement for Rights and Freedoms (MRF) -- two of the three parties in the coalition government. 
Alexandrov, who went on leave last week to facilitate the investigation into the scandal, has accused Ovcharov, who is also one of the deputy chairmen of the BSP, not only of involvement in corruption schemes, but of having threatened him personally. 
Claiming he was the victim of a "smear campaign," the economy minister blamed circles within his party, which have been siphoning state funds, of being behind the economically motivated attack against him. "Many people were kicked out of the game after sponging on the state," he told reporters Friday, rejecting calls by opposition lawmakers for his resignation. 
Returning from a visit to Portugal, Stanishev dismissed Ninova and Peevski. After his meeting with Ovcharov on Saturday, the government announced that the economy minister would take a leave following his return Wednesday from an official visit to Moscow as part of a large Stanishev-led delegation. 
Stanishev voiced hope Sunday that the probe into the case would reveal people and informal circles that have been using past contacts as tools for influence and blackmail over the past 17 years. 
After his meeting with the prime minister Sunday, the prosecutor general promised a swift and transparent probe into the first scandal in Bulgaria to involve such high-ranking officials. He and Interior Minister Roumen Petkov planned to send a letter to the European Commission (EC) on Monday to request that an EU expert be sent to Sofia to observe the investigation proceedings. 
The EU, which has been criticising Bulgaria for its insufficient fight against high-level corruption, is due to issue a monitoring report on the country next month. 
Meanwhile, some of the right-wing opposition parties in parliament have suggested they may file a motion of no confidence against the government over the corruption scandal. 
