21/10/2004
By Lundrim Aliu for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 21/10/04
Ethnic tensions, uncertainty over future status, a high unemployment rate and rising social frustration are some of the challenges facing Kosovo as voters prepare to go the polls Saturday (23 October) in the second parliamentary election to be held freely in the province. The vote is viewed as a major test of stability and democracy. 
"These will be the most important elections in Kosovo since 1999," said UNMIK chief Søren Jessen-Petersen. "The voters will elect a new assembly and government, which will be tasked with moving Kosovo forward in the implementation of standards. The future assembly and government will also be in charge when we start talks on final status." 
Last year, the UN and the Contact Group for the Balkans announced they would initiate the resolution of Kosovo's status in mid-2005 if they determine satisfactory progress has been made. With this in mind, Kosovo political leaders have focused their campaigns on gaining stronger positions in what most expect will be another broad coalition government. 
President Ibrahim Rugova, who heads the Democratic League of Kosovo, has pledged to seek more powers for Kosovo's provisional institutions of self-government, which are limited and supervised by UNMIK. His main rival, Hashim Thaci of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, argues that a government led by his party would be in a stronger position during status negotiations. 
Amid fears that discontent over living standards will lead to low turnout, candidates have made a point of addressing Kosovo's economic problems and stressing the possibility of eventual EU membership. The campaign has also seen the emergence of a new political movement, ORA (The Hour), which seeks to create "a functional society in Kosovo". 
The greatest source of uncertainty in these elections lies with the Serb community, which is hesitating over whether to take part. Serbian President Boris Tadic has publicly urged Kosovo Serbs to go the polls -- a stance that has made him the target of a nationalist campaign to remove him from office. 
The international community has called for the participation of all ethnic communities in Kosovo, including Serbs. "Only by participating in the democratic process can [Serbs] promote their legitimate concerns effectively," EU security chief Javier Solana said Wednesday, adding that an effective, representative government is "fundamental for achieving progress in the standards process and for bringing Kosovo closer to Europe". 
Due to security concerns, the NATO-led peacekeeping force, KFOR, has boosted its troop presence on the ground to 19,300, bringing in around 1,500 extra French, German and Italian Special Forces. On Tuesday, Petersen vowed that no one would be allowed to hamper the voting. 
