12/03/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova in Sofia and Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest -- 12/03/12
There were huge celebrations across Bulgaria on January 1st 2007 to mark the country's EU entry. But half a decade later, there were neither fireworks nor street parties to celebrate the fifth anniversary of one of the most important moments in the country's modern history. 
Most Bulgarians -- 68% in a recent poll – approve of EU membership today, although support has slipped since a 2007 poll in which 75% of people approved of the EU. Some expressed disappointment that their initial hopes for a better and more prosperous life have not immediately materialised. 
Despite this disappointment, the process of modernisation continued over the past five years, leading to clear achievements in certain areas, according to Lubov Panayotova, director of the European Institute (EI) in Sofia. 
"Generally, EU membership brought a much greater security in all areas," including production, governance and other fields, she told SETimes in a telephone interview. 
"One of the most obvious achievements is the free movement of people," which allows all Bulgarians to travel freely to any other European nation and spend some time there," Panayotova said. "Today, there are very few (EU) countries where Bulgarians cannot work." 
The EU is continuing to expand. Croatia is planning to join in 2013, and Serbia is a new candidate. Macedonia hopes to be offered EU membership with the EU meets this spring. 
Karekin Ara Hugasyan, deputy principal of the music school in the northern city of Pleven, also views free travel as one of the most positive aspects of Bulgaria's accession. 
"Some 70% to 80% of our students have been able to continue their education and life abroad since we joined the EU," he told SETimes. "Some even take the required exams in advance and then, once they finish school, they move to Europe right away." 
However, the standard of living of most Bulgarian citizens, including Hugasyan, hasn't improved much, if at all, over the past five years. Despite the hundreds of millions of euros Bulgaria has received in EU assistance, it remains the poorest country in the Union, just as it was when it joined the bloc. 
"Nevertheless, I still believe that our EU membership will force the Bulgarian authorities to comply with and implement the EU legal requirements. That would be a plus for us all," Hugasyan said. 
According to Mira Radeva, head of the Sofia-based MBMD polling agency, numerous surveys have shown that Bulgarians view Europeans as more decent, ethical and more hard-working than themselves. 
"That is why Bulgarians see the EU as a stabilising factor," she said. "They continue to believe in European integration and have greater confidence in foreign than in domestic authorities." 
Bulgarians have also learned to be more demanding as consumers, especially as concerns the quality of food and other products that could directly affect their health, Panayotova noted. They call for reforms in the justice system and follow every step in the process, and they have become less tolerant to police brutality. 
"In other words, Bulgarians are beginning to acquire a democratic reflex seen in other countries, where communism luckily never ruled, to fight for democracy and for their rights on a daily basis," Panayotova added. "Compared to people in the old EU member states, we have to go a long road before we become as active as citizens … But, we have understood the meaning and importance of rule of law and what rights we have, as well as that we need to fight to enjoy them every day." 
One of the biggest challenges Bulgaria still faces, according to her, is the removal of the special mechanism that was introduced in 2007 to monitor the country's progress in the fight against corruption and organised crime. 
In neighbouring Romania, officials say the years since accession have been marked by progress. "These five years have passed like a day. But the evolution is impressive and can be easily perceived in many fields: environment, urbanism, agriculture, labour market liberalisation -- despite some restrictions still in place -- and human rights," Atilla Korodi, head of the foreign affairs committee in the Chamber of Deputies, parliament's lower chamber, told SETimes. 
"Another major step forward I see is through Romania's participation in the European decision making process. Local and central decisions now make their way to Brussels. Our country is slowly taking its position within this mechanism. The European themes are now present on our agenda and are not seen as obligations anymore," Korodi added. 
Monica Macovei served as justice minister from 2004 to 2007 and more recently has been representing Romania in the European Parliament. "Romania was given an important commissioner -- for agriculture -- and is represented in the Council, the European Parliament, the European Court of Justice and other European Institutions. Participating in the decision making in the Union has also involved a process of learning and changing the way of doing politics," she told SETimes. 
Access to EU funds for developing and modernising the country, opportunities on the European labour market, free movement of people and access to studies in the EU member states are other benefits that came with the accession, Macovei added. 
But the biggest gain she says is the order EU has imposed. "Rule is the greatest gain and the most important instrument for changing the country. Joining the EU has brought new and strict rules that impose a different working style: effective, grounded and rapid. Along with the rule came predictability, essential for the country's development, for the private environment, for anyone who plans business and life," she underlined.
She highlights an example. "I for one see the Co-operation and Verification Mechanism with specific demands in the fields of anti-corruption fight and reform of justice as a big advantage for Romanians. Just look how slowly things are moving in the judiciary, how much resistance to reform is there." 
While acknowledging some progress, Korodi agrees much more is needed. "All these reforms meant to align us to the European standards must become part of the Romanian culture. At the same time, we tend to orient ourselves too much towards the EU and neglect traditional partners outside the communitarian bloc. We have lost much energy in the integration process and this is taking its toll in the rest of the world, affecting, for instance, our exports. This is why our presence in the EU doesn't have to be maintained just out of inertia. It has to be proactive and impact also outside the bloc," he underlined. 
Macovei relates the challenges ahead for Romania strictly to the EU environment. "The challenges concern the EU's rules that we have to learn to observe -- rules related to transparency, integrity, the anti-corruption fight and organised crime, the way public acquisitions are organised and the money then spent. Observing these rules will increase the other EU member states' confidence in Romania," she noted. 
The EU conjures up pro and cons among members of the public. "I remember queuing for the visas. It was humiliating. Then it's all gone. For my part, the EU has opened many doors to us. The question is if we know or are able to seize these opportunities," Alex Spanu, a media planner in Bucharest, told SETimes. 
"Looking back, I feel all this EU stuff has been utterly overblown. Because in the end, it is us here who manage the country and take it forward or backward, depending on our skills and will. The EU just keeps an eye on us," Laurentiu Dumitrascu, an accountant, told SETimes. 
