13/01/2009
(International Crisis Group, AFP, UPI, EUobserver, MIA, Makfax - 12/01/09)
The long-running name dispute between Macedonia and Greece is threatening to undermine international efforts to stabilise the Western Balkans, a prominent think tank warned on Monday (January 12th). 
 "This is more than a bilateral dispute between Skopje and Athens," International Crisis Group (ICG) Deputy President Donald Steinberg said. "It risks derailing the main strategy of both NATO and the EU for stabilising Macedonia and the region, based on enlargement and integration." 
There is "no imminent risk" of a return to ethnic violence in Macedonia, the Brussels-based group stressed on Monday in a report, titled "Macedonia's Name: Breaking the Deadlock". However, ties between Skopje and Athens have deteriorated to levels reminiscent of the early 1990s, following Greece's decision last April to veto an invitation to its northern neighbour to join NATO, the ICG noted. Athens is also threatening to block the opening of EU accession talks with Macedonia. 
"By blocking NATO and EU integration, Greece appeared to contravene its undertaking in the 1995 Interim Accord between the two states, not to let the name issue stand in the way of Macedonia's membership of international organisations," said Sabine Freizer, the head of the ICG's Europe Programme. 
But the organisation also urged Macedonia to avoid steps which Greeks consider a provocative appropriation of their Hellenic heritage. The renaming of both Skopje's international airport and Macedonia's main highway for Alexander the Great irritated the Greeks. 
The two countries must rebuild trust as a first step towards resolving their more than 17-year-long dispute, the ICG noted, urging Skopje to accept UN mediator Matthew Nimetz's latest proposal to rename the country the "Republic of North Macedonia" for international purposes. 
"Pending agreement, Skopje should use its provisional name, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, in all multilateral forums, and Athens should drop its veto threats," the group said. 
Greece should also acknowledge the "Macedonian" identity and language of its northern neighbour, bearing in mind this does not affect application of the same term to the Greek province of Macedonia. 
The ICG called for the Skopje airport to regain its original name, also urging the two countries to reaffirm their commitment to the 1995 Interim Accord. 
Lastly, the group called on other NATO and EU member states to "actively encourage" Greece to unblock Macedonia's bid to join the two organisations and "to respond positively to Skopje's concessions on the country's name". 
