28/04/2005
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 28/04/05
Republika Sprska's (RS) Srebrenica Commission should complete its work by 31 May, finalising all activities aimed at identifying and bringing to justice all those responsible for the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, High Representative Paddy Ashdown said last week in a letter to RS Prime Minister Pero Bukejlovic. He was responding to a report submitted by the Bosnian Serb entity's Srebrenica Commission on 31 March. 
While crediting the commission with producing a serious piece of work, Ashdown cautioned that the document was incomplete and did not meet all requirements set by him last December -- mainly because of insufficient co-operation by the RS ministries of interior and defence. Both failed to provide specific data on individuals who participated in the Srebrenica operation, Ashdown said. He requested that RS authorities immediately reconvene the commission to ensure the missing information is forwarded to the BiH Prosecutor's Office and the UN war crimes tribunal in The Hague. 
Almost a decade has passed since Bosnian Serb troops over ran the UN safe haven of Srebrenica on 11 July 1995. The subsequent massacre, in which as many as 8,000 men and boys were slaughtered, is considered the worst in Europe since World War II. 
"In the area of Srebrenica in July 1995, crimes of huge extent were committed by means of rude violation of the international humanitarian law … the government of RS is committed to and it assumes decisive measures to bring to justice all persons who committed war crimes," the commission said, naming 892 people to be investigated in connection with the killings. 
These people are still employed in municipal, entity or state institutions. The confidential report was submitted to the BiH Prosecutor's Office, which will handle legal proceedings. Members of the Organisation of Srebrenica Women announced they would request the immediate start of court proceedings against all individuals named in the report, as soon as it is published. 
Ashdown, meanwhile, has urged the RS government to investigate the role of individuals who are suspected of war crimes, but are still working in governmental agencies. He stressed that the priority would be to identify those working in the RS ministries of defence and internal affairs, the RS Army and any other entity or state security agency. Ashdown advised prosecutors to determine individual guilt among those named in the commission report, based on submitted evidence. Those who face prosecution will be suspended from their office or duty, in accordance with regulations. 
The Srebrenica Commission was established when the Human Rights Chamber for BiH accepted 49 applications from victims' families suing RS over its failure to provide and disclose information about missing family members. 
