19/05/2008
By Ana Blazevic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 19/05/08
The UN's latest "Monthly Summary of Contributors of Military and Civilian Peacekeeping Personnel" put Croatia at the very top, with contributions to 15 out of 17 ongoing missions. Croatia is followed by Bangladesh, Nepal, Nigeria and Sweden, all of which participate in 14 missions. 
Just a few years ago, Croatia itself was the beneficiary of a peacekeeping mission, the key UN instrument for maintaining international peace and security. The missions help countries torn by conflict to develop and maintain conditions for peace. 
Croatian troops are currently serving in Burundi, the Western Sahara, Haiti, Cyprus, Lebanon, Sierra Leone, Ethiopia and Eritrea, Kosovo, Liberia, Nepal, Sudan, Timor-Leste, India and Pakistan, Cote D'Ivoire and Georgia. 
Four continents are currently home to 68 Croatian peacekeepers. When it comes to manpower, Pakistan tops that list with 10,629 people allocated around the world. 
Croatia first sent troops to Sierra Leone in 1999. 
Nearly ten years later, a group of 95 Croatian soldiers will go to the Golan Heights, between Israel and Syria this summer. Before parliament voted recently, Mate Raboteg, the ministry of defence state secretary, called the new mission a true honour for Croatia, more evidence that it merited its non-permanent membership on the UN Security Council. 
With Croatia's path to NATO nearing its culmination, Croatians more than ever are expressing doubts about NATO missions around the world and the possibility of Croatian deployments abroad. There are more than 200 men and women participating in NATO's ISAF mission in Afghanistan. Croatians first went there in 2003. 
Most of these missions are not considered dangerous. The NATO mission in Afghanistan is the riskiest, says Tonino Picula, vice president of parliament's Foreign Policy Committee. 
"But we also have to be careful about whom we send," says Picula, "so that the incident in the Western Sahara, when a Croatian soldier wrote graffiti at an archaeological site, does not happen again ... we should not disturb the image of our country and the UN." 
