23/12/2004
(AP, MIA, Makfax - 22/12/04)
Good interethnic relations are the key precondition for Macedonia's stability and success, President Branko Crvenkovski said Wednesday (22 December), calling for the quick adoption of remaining legislation aimed at improving the rights of the country's ethnic Albanian minority. 
"The indispensable prerequisite to all that matters in our country is to have good interethnic relations," Crvenkovski said in his annual address to the nation, delivered in parliament and broadcast on state television. "If we fail in this respect, all hopes for economic development and [joining] the EU or NATO will be in vain," he said. 
The past year was marked by serious tests, the president said, citing the death of his predecessor, Boris Trajkovski, two elections and three new governments, plus five months of political wrangling over the new decentralisation laws, culiminating in a referendum. 
While those events lacked the potential to trigger wider destabilisation, Crvenkovski noted, "The initial projected priorities were modified, and the social energy and political capacity were redirected." 
In his address, the president emphasised the importance of fulfilling the country's remaining obligations under the Ohrid Accord, including the adoption of a law on the use of minority symbols. Although another proposed law regulating the use of minority languages was not a direct obligation under Ohrid, Crvenskovski said, such legislation, "if well drafted …would be useful in order to avoid any possible arguments during the adoption of separate laws regulating different fields". 
The president also urged the government to start immediately a dialogue with the opposition on the timing of further steps in implementing constitutional provisions concerning the equitable representation of ethnic communities in public administration. It is an ongoing process, he said, and although considerable progress has been made, it requires more time for completion. 
Kosovo, Crvenkovski said, is the last major unresolved issue in the Balkans. The way in which this issue will be resolved, as well as the timing and the very outcome of the process, will very much influence the stability of the entire region, he said, urging both Belgrade and Pristina to steer clear of using his country to support their stances on the issue. 
"According to some of them, the possible independent status of Kosovo will be a threat to the territorial integrity of our country, while according to the others, it is precisely the opposite that will destabilise Macedonia and the whole region," the president said. "Neither one is true. The Republic of Macedonia is neither part of the problem nor the solution to the Kosovo crisis." 
All Macedonia wants to see is the establishment of rule of law and the building of institutions that will ensure this rule of law on the territory of Kosovo, Crvenkovski stressed. 
The next 12 to 18 months will be decisive for Macedonia's Euro-Atlantic integration process, he said. Skopje has indicated it hopes to be given EU candidate status and to receive an invitation to join NATO in 2006. Stressing that the key to those goals is in the hands of the entire nation, the president called for mobilising its social energy, collective know-how and intellectual potential towards their achievement. 
