18/02/2009
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 18/02/09
Former Defence Minister Fatmir Mediu will stand trial for dereliction of duty in connection with the lethal blasts at a munitions depot near Gerdec last year. In all, 26 people died in the incident, and hundreds were injured. 
Mediu is one of 14 people charged by the general prosecutor. If convicted, he faces a maximum penalty of six years in prison. 
Also indicted were former Army Chief of Staff Luan Hoxha and nine other military officers and ministry officials. The 11 military defendants remain free for the time being, with no trial date set. 
Both the owner and manager of the wrecked facility were charged earlier and are currently in custody awaiting trial, as is the director of Meico, the national arms export agency, which had responsibility for demolishing munitions at Gerdec. 
The dereliction-of-duty charges centre mostly on the decision to allow the facility to operate near populated areas. The blasts on March 15th 2008 occurred only 20km from Tirana and a few kilometres from the capital's international airport. 
The defendants also allegedly signed contracts with firms that lacked the expertise and licences needed for dismantling munitions. In addition, the defendants allegedly risked workers' lives by violating rules for safe handling of munitions. 
Mediu has denied any guilt. In a speech to parliament on February 12th, he called the process "politically motivated". 
"If the prosecutor becomes a political instrument, this is not only shameful but also risky," he told other MPs, who voted to lift his immunity in accordance with the request of the general prosecutor. Mediu resigned as defence minister days after the explosion. 
Prime Minister Sali Berisha supports the former cabinet member. "There is no proof that confirms Mr. Mediu's corruption or wrongdoing," he told Voice of America on February 7th. Nor was there "collective wrongdoing", he added. 
The opposition Socialists have pointed to the Gerdec case as a major instance of governmental corruption. Parliament member Erion Brace says the government is impeding the investigation. "The government breaches the law, causing 26 deaths, and the prime minister has not yet done a full analysis of this crime," said Brace. 
