08/09/2008
 (Various sources -- 22/07/08 - 04/09/08)
More than two years after the abrupt end of the war crimes trial against the late Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic, the case against another key figure from the Balkan conflicts in the 1990s puts the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in the spotlight again. 
 Former Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic was arrested in a Belgrade suburb on July 21st. Nine days later, the Serbian authorities handed him over to The Hague tribunal to answer charges of genocide and war crimes, stemming from the 1992-1995 conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). 
The wartime president of the Bosnian Serb Republic, later renamed Republika Srpska (RS), is the most senior official, aside from Milosevic, to face trial at the ICTY. 
An 11-count amended indictment issued in May 2000, replacing an initial one handed down in July 1995, charges Karadzic with a multitude of war crimes against non-Serbs, including extermination, murder, wilful killing, persecutions, deportation, inhumane acts, terrorising and taking of hostages. He faces two counts of genocide over the 44-month siege of Sarajevo and the 1995 Srebrenica massacre, Europe's worst atrocity since World War II. 
Serge Brammertz, a Belgian lawyer who succeeded Carla del Ponte of Switzerland as ICTY chief prosecutor, is keen to avoid a repeat of the Milosevic trial, which dragged on for more than four years to eventually end without a verdict in March 2006. The former Serbian leader, whose ill health led to numerous interruptions in the court proceedings, died of a heart attack in his prison cell on March 11th that year and the case was closed three days later. 
UN prosecutors and judges were criticised for the inefficient trial. The prosecution's decision to join Milosevic's three separate indictments relating to the conflicts in BiH, Croatia and Kosovo and containing a total of 66 counts into a single trial was cited as one of the main reasons for the trial's excessive duration. 
Political tirades by Milosevic, who conducted his own defense, also contributed to delays. Although judges did switch off the former Serbian leader's microphone at times, they came under fire for allowing him to hamper the proceedings and make a mockery of the court. 
Brammertz confirmed during the first pre-trial hearing on July 31st that his team was reviewing and updating the operative indictment. The purpose of the exercise was to ensure that it reflects the current case law, facts already established by the court and evidence collected over the past eight years. An amended indictment is expected to be issued by the end of September. 
 Like his former mentor, Karadzic is planning to represent himself in his trial. He is also widely expected to use some of the tactics employed by Milosevic to complicate matters. 
In his initial appearance before judges at The Hague court on July 31st, Karadzic refused to enter a plea to any of the charges against him, saying he was still studying them. A further initial appearance was then scheduled for August 29th. With the former Bosnian Serb leader again declining to plead, Judge Iain Bonomy -- who presided over the second hearing -- entered "not guilty" to each charge on his behalf, in line with tribunal procedures. 
Karadzic told the court he was being tried by a "court of NATO" that was out to liquidate him. 
 "I'm deeply convinced that this court is representing itself falsely as a court of the international community," Karadzic told Bonomy on August 29th. He has filed about ten different motions since August 1st, including two requests to ICTY President Fausto Pocar. 
The requests, both submitted on August 18th, called for the disqualification of Judge Alphons Orie, or any other judges from the Netherlands, from all judicial proceedings in his case. 
He claimed that Orie, the presiding judge of Trial Chamber I, was biased against him. Orie, he said, had a "personal" interest in convicting him so as to reinforce his judgments in earlier cases. 
Pocar eventually reassigned Karadzic's case to Trial Chamber III. It is presided over by Judge Patrick Robinson of Jamaica, and includes Bonomy and Jean-Claude Antonetti, a French judge. 
In at least two other earlier submissions to the tribunal's registry, Karadzic complained of irregularities surrounding his arrest in Serbia and claimed he had been a victim of a continuous "media witch hunt" that seriously jeopardised his chances for a fair trial. 
He also revived a long-circulated claim about a secret immunity deal he says was cut with US envoy Richard Holbrooke, who brokered the 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement (DPA) that ended the war in BiH. 
According to Karadzic, he received promises that he would not face trial in The Hague on condition he disappeared from political and public life and did not hamper the implementation of the DPA. He called on the court to summon Holbrooke, former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright and former chief ICTY prosecutor Richard Goldstone to testify. 
Holbrooke has denied that any immunity deal was made. He said he would never have countenanced such an idea because it would have been unethical and immoral. 
Goldstone, meanwhile, rejected Karadzic's allegations that he came under pressure from the US State Department to suspend the indictment. 
"Neither the American nor any other government ever asked me to drop the charges against Karadzic," a report by Belgrade-based B92 on August 7th quoted him as saying. 
Even if the alleged agreement did exist, it would have been "completely irrelevant to the legality of the proceedings" because Holbrooke was never a tribunal official, Goldstone added. 
Disputing the existence of Karadzic's alleged immunity agreement with Holbrooke, UN prosecutors have also rejected his complaints about irregularities during his initial appearance. During that hearing, he was not allowed to read out a statement in court, but was given instead two minutes to summarise its contents. 
Several months will pass before the trial kicks off, probably early next year. Brammertz believes it will be a complex one, but says his team's intention is to present its case "in the most efficient manner". 
Karadzic could face a possible life sentence if convicted. 
