17/05/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 17/05/10
For a second year in a row, Romania shined at the Geneva International Invention Fair, with representatives winning gold medals in three different fields -- auto, medical and baby clothing. 
The fair, in late April, was held at the Palexpo facilities in Geneva. It drew 780 inventors from 45 countries. Romania presented 1,000 inventions. 
Raluca Ioana van Staden took the award for best female inventor for a sensor that detects cancer at the molecular level. Romanian TV star Andreea Marin-Banica won gold for an extendable baby bodysuit. Student Corneliu Birtok-Baneasa won for an invention that reduces auto fuel consumption. 
"My invention is called air transfer dynamic device. In brief, it improves the air flow to the air filters of the car, which generates an up to 20% fuel consumption decrease, especially during the warm season," Birtok-Baneasa, a senior at the auto section of the Engineering Faculty in Hunedoara, central Romania, told SETimes. 
"I created the first filter in 2000 for my own car, and then started to test them on my friends' cars. In 2008, I came up with the air transfer dynamic device, which I tested on my girlfriend's car." 
Birtok-Baneasa received support for his research from the Engineering Faculty and from a specialised institute in Bucharest after participating in the 2007 national invention fair. 
 "It was an invention that came out of necessity," he said. "I intend to start my own business and hopefully, as of the second half of the year, to have my own production line. I estimate a selling price around 13 euros." 
Van Staden recently returned to Romania after ten years of researching abroad. "My invention consists of a new type of sensor which can be used to detect cancer in less than six minutes, directly from a blood sample," she told the public radio station. 
 "[The test can detect] cancer in the breast, ovaries, gastro-intestinal and prostate," she added, noting that early detection can lead to better outcomes. The sensor she created is made up of a diamond paste, and measures less than 1mm. 
Marin-Banica attracted interest with her extendable baby bodysuit, branded "Violet" after her daughter. 
"I am a mere 'occasional inventor'. My idea [was] simple and very useful to children in their first year of life, being inspired by my daughter's needs when she was a couple of months old," Marin-Banica wrote on her blog. 
MB Telecom President Mircea Tudor -- the 2009 Geneva Inventions Exhibition grand prix winner for a device that scans trucks -- was a member of the jury. 
