13/07/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 13/07/06
Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu was expected to address the UN Security Council Thursday (13 July) during an informal meeting. 
 "I will call for support of Kosovo's independence in the Security Council," Sejdiu said before flying to New York on Tuesday. "It is a very important moment that I have a chance to address the representatives of the Security Council and to present the aspects of our political vision." 
Although Sejdiu's presentation was to be given at a sideline session, rather than a formal meeting in the Security Council room, it nevertheless marks the first time a Kosovo official has addressed the body. Prime Minister Agim Ceku and his predecessor, Bajram Kosumi, have attended Security Council sessions but did not have the right to address members. 
Following talks with Kosovo's delegation to the status talks in Vienna, Sejdiu termed independence a "non-negotiable" demand for his side, and suggested that a sovereign Kosovo should be given a permanent seat in the UN. 
"Each independent state … wants to be an important factor in the international community, no matter if this state is small or big," he said. 
While formally part of Serbia, Kosovo has been run as a de facto UN protectorate since 1999, when NATO action forced the regime of Slobodan Milosevic to withdraw from the province. Most of its predominantly Albanian population favours independence, while Serbia wants to retain sovereignty and is offering "essential autonomy" instead. 
Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, who reiterated his side's position during talks with US officials this week, will also address the Security Council. He is not expected to meet with Sejdiu. 
"Kosovo's independence would lead the region to serious instability," he said at a news conference Tuesday after talks with US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice. 
The same day, Serbian President Boris Tadic said in an interview on state television that Belgrade is making an all-out effort to retain some form of sovereignty over Kosovo. However, he warned, its negotiating position is weak because of the legacy of the Milosevic years. 
Milosevic's policies have left Serbia without much room to manoeuvre, Tadic said, adding that the government would nevertheless "fight until the last minute using the legitimate means" of diplomacy. 
