21/04/2005
(EurActiv - 21/04/05; EU, AFP, AP, Reuters, EUobserver, Euro-reporters, Defense News, Kosovareport, Radio B92 - 20/04/05)
The European Commission (EC) has pledged to continue assisting Kosovo in meeting its goal of EU integration, if its leaders show a clear commitment to reform and the achievement of democratic standards. 
"The commission will continue to help Kosovo to make progress towards Europe, provided that the political leaders of Kosovo clearly demostrate their strong commitment to the rule of law, human rights, democratic principles, the rights of minorities and economic reform," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Wednesday (20 April), announcing a new policy document on Kosovo. "Ultimately, Kosovo's future is in the hands of its people." 
Given the upcoming review of Kosovo's progress in achieving UN-endorsed standards, the province is certain to remain high on the agenda in the coming months, an EC statement said. A positive assessment could open the way for talks to determine the UN-administered province's final status, which are expected to begin this autumn. 
The EU has provided 1.6 billion euros for humanitarian aid, reconstruction and economic support initiatives since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo. The main areas the new document covers include economic development, building institutional capacity, financial assistance, and Kosovo's links with the rest of the region. 
"We want to make the European future of Kosovo concrete and tangible in the everyday life of its people," Rehn said during his Wednesday press conference, adding that the EU's goal is to help build "a truly multiethnic Kosovo in which all citizens feel secure and equally treated". 
The commissioner also urged Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova to accept Serbian President Boris Tadic's offer last week for a meeting. 
"It is very important to start a constructive dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina," Rehn said. "I have noted positive developments in this regard -- the willingness to stretch the hand by President Tadic -- and I encourage President Rugova to take this seriously and proceed to have a constructive dialogue." 
Rugova, who earlier rejected Tadic's invitation, suggested Wednesday that he would agree to the meeting provided it is also attended by representatives of the international community. 
 "I do not want to do anything without the international community which is here, and direct political talks with Belgrade are very difficult and impossible to conduct," Rugova was quoted as saying following talks with a delegation of NATO's Parliamentary Assembly visiting Pristina. 
