07/12/2010
(Balkans.com, Zaman, Emg.rs - 07/12/10; Reuters, Foxnews, BBC, Euronews, Sofia news Agency, Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool, Makfax, B92 - 06/12/10)
Several Balkan countries were still struggling on Monday (December 6th) to cope with the impact of massive flooding caused by days of torrential rains and blamed for at least three deaths and the evacuation of 20,000 people from inundated areas. 
While the floods in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Montenegro and Serbia have been described as the worst those countries have witnessed in a century, parts of Bulgaria and Croatia have also been affected by the extreme weather. 
About 12,000 people had to be evacuated from their homes in northern Albania as roads turned into raging torrents of water and 14,000 hectares of land surrounding the swollen Lake Shkoder were inundated. 
The situation in that part of the country was still critical Monday, as the town of Shkodra remained inaccessible by land. Its streets are under two metres of water. A state of emergency has been declared also in Lezha, south of Shkodra, and the country's second-largest city, Durres, 33km west of Tirana. 
Responding to Albania's call for help, NATO sent five Turkish and Greek helicopters to deliver essential supplies and to assist the Albanian army and police in search and rescue operations. 
"The situation is difficult, very difficult," Reuters quoted Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha as saying Monday. "The water of the Shkoder Lake has doubled in size and even flooded villages in Montenegro. The evacuation will not be short term." 
In neighbouring Montenegro, the area surrounding Lake Shkoder, or Lake Skadarsko as it is known there, was also one of the regions worst affected by flooding. About 2,000 people had to be evacuated from their inundated homes and Podgorica also called for international assistance. 
"We are a young system and we don't have sufficient means to deal with such catastrophes," the Montenegrin Army's General Staff chief Dragan Samardzic said on Saturday. 
In northeastern BiH, nearly 4,000 people have been evacuated with the help of the army, police, volunteers and divers over the past few days. The worst incident occurred on Sunday, when three family members were killed in the town of Tuzla as their home collapsed after heavy rains triggered a landslide. 
Bosnian authorities declared a state of emergency for the eastern towns of Bijeljina, Visegrad and Zvornik along the Drina River, which forms the country's natural border with Serbia, where more than 1,400 people from the town of Loznica have reportedly been evacuated. 
According to Reuters, damage caused by the floods in the four Balkan countries over the past few days amounted to 340m euros. 
Meanwhile, the situation in parts of southwestern Bulgaria remained critical on Monday, two days after the swollen Struma River damaged the E79, the main road leading to neighbouring Greece. The E79 is expected to remain closed for about two weeks. 
Rescuers were still searching for a truck driver, who disappeared along with his lorry into the raging river waters at the weekend. Another potential fatal incident had a happy ending late Sunday night, when rescuers saved four adults and three teenagers who had been stranded in a cave in western Bulgaria for two days. 
