27/05/2010
(Various Bulgarian press sources -- 03/05/10 - 20/05/10; WAZ.Euobserver - 12/05/10)
A specialised court to try cases of organised crime and corruption, particularly involving high-level officials, is expected to be set up in Bulgaria within months, in a bid to speed up prosecutions. 
The two-tier system, including a first-instance court to handle trials and a second-instance one to deal with appeals, would be based in Sofia and would have a special prosecution office attached to it. The Supreme Court of Cassation would be the third and final instance to rule on cases within the specialised court's purview. 
The ruling centre-right Citizens for the European Development of Bulgaria (GERB) party reportedly plans to push the needed amendments to the country's Judiciary System Act and the Penal Procedure Code through parliament before lawmakers' summer vacation. 
The specialised court idea was proposed by Interior Minister Tsvetan Tsvetanov in late April, following a series of police operations against organised crime groups, in which dozens of suspects were arrested. 
GERB, which won the July 2009 parliamentary elections on a promise to fight rampant corruption and crime, also launched a major clampdown on graft shortly after it stepped into power, replacing the previous Socialist-led three-way coalition government. 
Four former ministers -- social affairs, defence and two agriculture chiefs -- have been charged with abuse of power, and a number of other investigations into suspicious deals concluded by former Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev's cabinet are under way. 
But the big question now is whether those who committed serious crimes will get the punishment they deserve. 
According to a recent survey by Bulgaria's Supreme Bar Council (SBC), nearly 31,000 people have been convicted of different criminal charges in the last three years, with only 39 of them, or less than 0.5%, found guilty of involvement in organised crime. 
"Today we are reaping the fruits of an impotent judicial system," Tsvetanov said at a round-table discussion in Sofia on May 3rd. "If we had an effective prosecution, we would not be discussing now the need for the establishment of special courts." 
But his proposal has been met with criticism by the opposition Bulgarian Socialist Party and its former junior coalition partner, the Movement for Rights and Freedoms, as well as by some Bulgarian lawyers and human rights group. 
SBC head Daniela Dokovska insisted that the project sets the stage for the creation of two types of courts in Bulgaria -- one for general trials and another for cases "the government wants to win by all means". 
Some lawyers say the main reason that some of those working in the judicial system are opposed to Tsvetanov's proposal is that magistrates would be appointed in the new court after a thorough scrutiny to ensure that only people of integrity will work in it. 
 Prime Minister Boyko Borisov, who served as chief secretary at the interior ministry from 2001 to 2005, often accused judges at the time of being too soft on criminals. 
 "We [police] catch them and they set them free," he used to say. 
Those backing Tsvetanov's idea include Prosecutor-General Boris Velchev and the head of the Supreme Administrative Court, Konstantin Penchev, the leader of the nationalist Ataka Party, Volen Siderov, and the co-chairman of the right-wing Blue Coalition, Ivan Kostov. 
"We need to have a specialised court," Penchev said at the May 3rd discussion, arguing that it would not only help speed up the trials but would also contribute to a more effective fight against organised crime and corruption in Bulgaria. 
