19/04/2011
By Alakbar Raufoglu for Southeast European Times -- 19/0411
The 56-member Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) has traditionally selected its secretary-general from EU member states, but is now aiming to expand to the east with a candidate from Turkey. 
Ankara's nominee is Ersin Ercin, President Abdullah Gul's special envoy for European Security and current ambassador to Brazil. 
He is competing against strong rivals: former Austrian Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik, former OSCE Parliamentary Assembly head Joao Soares, and UNMIK chief Lamberto Zannier. 
"I promise a proactive and expansive role for the OSCE," Ercin said in a Twitter posting last month, pledging to be a "confident, visionary, dynamic and energetic" secretary-general. "The OSCE should leave one phase in its history, marked by confrontation and division, and enter a new era of trust, hope, compromise and unity." 
Turkish parliament's foreign affairs commission spokesman and AKP deputy Metin Yilmaz says Ankara needs a top OSCE position. 
"The security of Eastern Europe is very important for us," he told SETimes, adding that Ankara has historical ties and influence in the region that would boost the OSCE's efficacy. 
"It is obvious that Turkey is vital to preserving strong security and democracy in the region," he added. 
A European security analyst at the University of Delaware, Juliette Tolay, believes it would be refreshing for the OSCE to have a non-EU/Western European secretary-general. 
"It would affirm the autonomy of the OSCE from other European organisations and remind of the broader focus of the organisation," she told SETimes. 
European Policy Centre policy analyst Amanda Paul agrees that Ankara would be well suited for this job, arguing Turkey has proactive links with many of the key players in the OSCE, including Russia. 
"Turkey is trying to increase its influence in the OSCE, as well as other international organisations, as it represents a natural continuation of the new dynamic foreign policy efforts under way" by Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu, she told SETimes. 
US Marshall Fund transatlantic fellow Emiliano Alessandri is not optimistic about Ankara's chances, however. 
"Turkish leadership of the organisation can be seen as a problem by countries that have, or have had, bilateral disputes or rivalries with Ankara," he told SETimes. "Despite recent efforts to pursue zero problems with neighbours, not all of Turkey's neighbours have solved all their issues with Turkey." 
The OSCE is also an organisation focused on democracy and human rights, and criticism of human rights and the highly polarised debate on democratisation in Turkey can have negative reverberations on Turkey's bid, he adds. 
"Even if Turkey manages to lead the OSCE top position," Alessandri says, "it will not change the logic of Turkey-EU relations, nor have any direct impact on the stalling accession process." 
The new secretary-general will replace France's Marc Perrin de Brichambaut, who has held the post since June 2005. The new secretary-general will start in July. 
