31/05/2005
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 31/05/05
Having answered additional questions in the EU Questionnaire, the Macedonian government is preparing for EU membership candidate status, with the European Commission's (EC) avis expected this fall. Optimism was evident at the 3rd National Forum for Accelerated Integration of Macedonia in the EU, held on 25 May under the auspices of President Branko Crvenkovski. Topics at the forum differed greatly from the previous two sessions. 
 In past years, the forum focused on post-conflict settlements and whether to proceed with applying for EU membership. This year, by contrast, participants addressed three topics: how to reach the EU internal market, preparations for accession talks, and the management of EU funds and pre-accession instruments. The topics reflect the agenda put forth by the EC, and suggest that the country has moved considerably along the path to accession. 
"My assessment is that Macedonia has been striding successfully on its road to joining the EU," Crvenkovski told the forum. In just three years, he said, Macedonia has gone from being a country requiring European intervention to one that awaits EU candidate status. "This shows that the process that was outlined as an essential strategic goal of the country has been carried out successfully," he added. 
Deputy Prime Minister Radmila Sekerinska, who is in charge of European integration, spoke about the process of "Europeanising" Macedonian society, saying that it would be reflected in the country's legislation, political parties and institutions. Changes should also be made in Macedonia's employment policy, she said. 
Talks between Macedonia and the EC were set to continue in Brussels on Tuesday (31 May). In a meeting with Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, Sekerinska will talk about the current reform processes in the judiciary and police, liberalisation of the telecommunications market, and two remaining legislative obligations from the Ohrid Accord. 
Possibly as early as 10 June, a meeting of the Committee for Stabilisation and Association will be held, also in Brussels. Macedonian representatives will report on the country's progress in making changes and reforms necessary to fulfil its Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the Union. 
