07/06/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/06/05
Serbia-Montenegro Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic has said he expects one of the UN war crimes tribunal's top indictees, Ratko Mladic, to appear before The Hague within the next few months. At a seminar Monday (6 June), Davinic said Serbia-Montenegro authorities realise their hopes for Euro-Atlantic integration will not proceed while Mladic is at large, and they are determined to resolve the case. 
The recent broadcast of videotape showing the executions of prisoners from Srebrenica has made full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal even more urgent, the minister added. 
In the wake of an EBRD annual meeting that Belgrade hosted, officials have been increasingly bullish about prospects for integration. According to federal Human and Minority Rights Minister Rasim Ljajic, however, co-operation with The Hague remains a key issue that must not be overlooked. 
"The question of Ratko Mladic keeps popping up," Ljajic said following a visit to Washington, where he met with State Department and National Security Council officials. "It is explicitly said that without his arrest, Serbia-Montenegro will not be accepted in the Partnership for Peace (PfP)." 
At the beginning of the year, US Ambassador to Belgrade Michael C. Polt announced that Washington was suspending financial aid to Belgrade until co-operation improves. Ljajic said he believes that will change only when Serbia-Montenegro provides "real actions and evidence". 
Aid from the United States affects the country's international financial rating and its ability to gain support from institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank, he noted. 
Brussels has also stressed the importance of co-operation with The Hague. Despite the EU's positive feasibility study, it is "hard to imagine" that a Stabilisation and Association Agreement would be signed next year unless all outstanding Hague-related issues have "entirely and successfully come to an end", said German Ambassador to Serbia-Montenegro Andreas Cobel. 
The latest report by the International Crisis Group, meanwhile, found that Serbia made significant positive steps in the first months of this year, but cautioned that the government continues to make some regressive moves. 
The Belgrade administration has demonstrated progress on the war crimes issue as well as readiness for dialogue about the final status of Kosovo, the report says. "This has paid off. Instead of the renewed isolation that threatened at the start of the year, [Serbia] has received a green light from the EU to begin negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement -- a significant if early step towards membership." 
Because of the "one step forward, one step backward" dynamic that still plagues reform in the country, international pressure will be needed "to ensure that reforms stick and real progress occurs," according to the report. 
