06/09/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 06/09/10
Economic woes have made it harder for many to afford a summer vacation, and that's bad news in a region where the tourism sector drives much of the growth. 
Hopes that the 2010 season would bring a turnaround did not bear fruit, and many countries are recording a dramatic reduction in the number of visitors. Still, there are exceptions. 
In this report, we take a look at how five countries coped with the downturn. 
 Croatia  
While some visitors spent less than they normally do on vacation, Croatia had one of the better summers in the region as far as tourism figures are concerned. Authorities hope revenues from the sector will help in overcoming the large state deficit caused by the global financial mess. 
At the peak of the summer season, in the first weekend of August, 1.5 million tourists entered Croatia. On August 12th, Tourism Minister Damir Bajs voiced hope that the country could match the results of last year's season. 
That would mean an injection of over 6.3 billion euros into the Croatian economy. 
 The numbers so far suggest that target may be in range. Although the number of tourists visiting the country was higher by 6,600 at the same time a year ago, the gap is not large. On average, more than 1 million people spend their summers on Croatia's Adriatic coast during peak season. 
 Czechs, Polish, Hungarian, Slovenian, German and Italian tourists have long been coming in droves, while the French, Scandinavian and British are still rediscovering Croatia as a vacation spot. 
"Tourists come, but they spend less than the years before. That is normal, we live in difficult times so you cannot expect them to spend like crazy," said Petar, a restaurant cook from Hvar. 
 Romania  
After a 30% decrease in 2009, Romania's tourism continues the downward trend this year. 
The economic crisis in the country was severe and far from over. In response, Romanians have avoided traveling abroad, choosing instead to vacation at local mountain resorts and the seaside. 
 A study commissioned by the Wall Street Journal showed in June that 43% of Romanians planned to take only one week of vacation instead of the usual three to four as a result of hardship and fear of job loss. About 70% said they prefer to spend the holidays at home due to financial reasons. 
Another study by Insight 360 shows that one in three gave up on vacation altogether. 
 Montenegro 
After a dry June and July, when beaches and mountain centers in Zabljak and Kolasin were half empty, tourists crowded Montenegro's seaside and mountains in August. 
According to preliminary numbers for the month, there were 120,670 tourists in Montenegro, 16% more than the same period last year, said the tourism ministry. 
The government estimated that 1.1 million tourists would visit the country, an amount similar to last year's results. 
On August 1st, data indicated that most tourists in the first six months of the year were from Serbia -- 24% and a significant number from the EU. 
Twenty percent of tourists were from the former Yugoslavia countries, while 18% arrived from Russia and the former Soviet Union. In Ulcinj, the southernmost Montenegrin municipality, the majority of vacationers were from Kosovo. 
Montenegro Airlines transported 17% more passengers in the first half of the year than in the same period last year. Border crossings saw an increase of 1%, while the number of visitors to national parks in first three months was up 47% year-on-year. 
Estimates indicate that this year's tourism income will be 620m euros -- about 1% more than in 2009. 
 Domestic tourists in Montenegro are travelling less compared to in 2009, and especially compared to 2008, which had the highest numbers of domestic travelers. 
 "Interest [in travelling] is less by 10% compared to 2009. Since visa liberalisation, travel interest went up, but that has overlapped with the economic crisis, so our expectations were not fulfilled," Sreten Kankaras, the director of a Podgorica-based tourist organization, told SETimes. 
 Serbia  
Serbia's Chamber of Commerce data reflect a decline in the country's tourism. 
The number of tourists visiting Serbia in the first six months of 2010 fell by 8%, and overnight stays dropped by 15%, in the same period in 2009. The number of domestic tourists dropped by 11% and their overnight stays by 17%, while the number of foreign tourists dropped by 3% and their overnight stays by 6%. 
In the first six months of 2010, more than 911,000 tourists visited Serbia. About 620,000 were travelling domestically, while more than 290,000 were foreign. There were a total of 2.8 million overnight stays. 
Belgrade saw the highest number of arrivals and overnight stays – more than 256,000 visitors and more than 495,000 overnight stays, but these numbers are still less than the first half of 2009. 
The highest number of tourists visiting Serbia came from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Slovenia, Montenegro and Croatia, followed by Germans, Italians, Macedonians, Bulgarians, Austrians and Greeks. 
In May, research results show that 70% of Serbs did not plan a vacation. 
"I've managed to afford ten days with friends in Greece, but it will require a lot of sacrifice. I will suffer over the next few months," Milos Cerovina, 26, told SETimes. 
"I have a family of four and there was no way that we could afford a holiday. The children are now with my parents. They live near the Bela Crkva Lakes. It is beautiful there and I will join them soon," said Mirjana Dimic, 42. 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina  
The global economic downturn did not adversely affect BiH tourism. Due to foreign visitors, rose by 30% more than last year. Most visitors from Turkey, Croatia and Slovenia come for a quick stay, while tourists from Ireland, Egypt and France settle in for longer periods, said the BiH Federal Ministry of Environment and Tourism. 
 Bosnia's virtually untouched nature, extraordinary cultural heritage, long tradition and healthy food are a lure for vacationers. 
 "No doubt tourists will spend less visiting BiH, but the destinations that we offer are a balance between investment and experience. The national tourist sector is in constant struggle for every guest, and everything we have invested so far gives returns," said the Tourist Organisation of the Republika Srpska (RS). 
The Chinese agency Xinhua included Mostar among the 19 European cities worth visiting this summer. Even domestic tourists, in this time of economic crisis, chose to explore their own country, which hadn't been the case until now. 
 Regionwide tourism 
When it comes to spending holidays in Croatia or Montenegro, regional tourist agencies say many choose to spend a weekend at sea rather than vacation longer in one place. 
"Fewer are interested in other destinations like Paris or Prague.Weekend travels to Croatia are in demand, which cost around 100 euros," one tourist agent told SETimes. 
 Pale's Jahorina Tours in BiH said that many try to save money, even if they decide to take a vacation. 
"To spend five days in Turkey, if you fly, costs around around 245 euros, and if you take the same tour for seven days and travel by bus, its around 125 euros," said a worker in this agency. 
 Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest, Nedeljko Rudovic in Podgorica, Ljiljana Smiljanic in Banja Luka, Bedrana Kaletovic in Sarajevo, Natasa Radic in Zagreb contributed to this report.  
