17/04/2006
(FT, The Scotsman, International Herald Tribune, Irish Examiner, Independent, The Times - 17/04/06; AP, Reuters, BBC, CNN, FT, Rompres, Mediafax, BNN, Sofia news Agency, Mediapool, Dnevnik.bg - 16/04/06)
Hundreds of people in Serbia, Romania and Bulgaria have been forced to leave their homes as spring snow melt and heavy rains pushed the Danube River to record high levels, causing floods in many parts across the region. 
Emergency workers and volunteers were working hard Sunday (16 April) to make sure that embankments would not give way as Europe's second-longest river rose to a 111-year record high. 
Serbian authorities have declared a state of emergency in ten regions as the Danube and its three tributaries, the Sava, the Tisa and the Tamis rivers, reached dangerous levels. 
Belgrade, the meeting point of the Danube and the Sava rivers, is among the Serbian cities hit by the floods, which have left lower-lying streets of the capital and an ancient fortress under water. The Danube reached a level of 843cm there, leading to the closure of waterfront roads to traffic. About 100 buildings have been damaged and several hundred of the city's residents have been evacuated. 
A bottleneck at Serbia's narrow Djerdap gorge, near the border with Romania, is said to have caused the Danube waters to rise upstream all the way to Belgrade. 
"We have reinforced barriers which will resist the wave, but the question is how long the water level will remain so high," said Srdjan Jovanovic, the head of Belgrade's flood defence team. "That's what's worrying." 
Jovanovic also appealed to residents to avoid a popular recreation spot on the Sava. Some young women, according to him, had pierced sandbags with their high heels, raising the risk of collapse. "The danger is big, and water can break the top of the dikes. The whole recreation area would be flooded in only a few seconds," he said. 
In Serbia, the highest water level of 957cm was recorded at Veliko Gladiste, where the Danube forms the border with Romania. The river could rise a further 30cm within the next few days. 
In the country's northern Vojvodina province, about 10,000 hectares of farmland have been completely swamped and some 200,000 hectares have been turned into mud and slush that could threaten crops in Serbia's breadbasket. 
In Romania, where 12 districts are in a state of emergency, authorities have ordered the controlled flooding of up to 90,000 hectares of forests and farmland in a bid to prevent the river from engulfing urban areas there and across the river in Bulgaria. 
"The water flow has fallen by 200 cubic metres per second," Reuters quoted Beatrice Popescu, of the Romanian Environment Ministry, as saying. "This is a success." 
Neighbouring Bulgaria, meanwhile, has declared a crisis situation in all municipalities in seven regions that stretch down the Danube River valley. In the northwestern Bulgarian port city of Vidin, home to about 50,000 people, an emergency tent camp for 1,200 people has been set up just outside the city. The water level there reached 966cm during the weekend. Most of the city's industrial zone is flooded. 
Some 40 per cent of the town of Nikopol, to the east of Vidin, was inundated Saturday, when the Danube waters rose to 865cm. Soldiers and divers continued to fortify dikes there and in other partially swamped towns, including Lom. Bulgarian Emergency Management Minister Emel Etem, meanwhile, warned that the Danube would reach a new peak by Wednesday. 
