12/08/2005
By Allan Cove for Southeast European Times -- 12/08/05
Relations between NATO allies Greece and Turkey have warmed considerably since 1996, when the two came close to an armed confrontation over an uninhabited Aegean Sea islet. The humanitarian efforts during the earthquakes that struck the countries in 1999 initiated a rapprochement that continues to bear fruit in the form of improved co-operation in trade and tourism. In addition, the former rivals have held closed-door talks aimed at resolving their territorial and airspace disputes. 
In May 2004, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan paid an official visit to Athens, becoming the first Turkish prime minister to do so in 16 years. Sometime this fall, Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis will make the first official trip to Turkey by a Greek prime minister in 46 years. The visit is intended to emphasise Greece's support for Turkey's membership bid. However, in a sign that outstanding issues remain, Karamanlis has postponed the trip -- originally scheduled for August -- until later this fall, reportedly in order to urge Ankara to recognise Cyprus. 
Turkey and Greece have strengthened their relationship by building a $300m, 285-km pipeline from Bursa, Turkey, to Komotini, Greece, that will become operational in 2006. This project, launched by Erdogan and Karamanlis, will connect rich natural gas fields in the Caspian Sea and Central Asia to energy-hungry markets in Europe. The project is part of a wider scheme to develop Turkey as an energy transit point. 
The two countries have also held a series of annual bilateral meetings that have resulted in concrete steps to boost tourism. According to the joint declaration released on 29 June, both sides agreed to establish joint tourism packages. To this end, a co-operation protocol was signed between the Turkish Association of Travel Agents and the Hellenic Association of Travel and Tourism Agencies. 
As official ties continue to improve, Greek and Turkish citizens now also have increased opportunities to develop friendships. Thanks to ferries that now cruise between Greek islands and Turkish tourist locations, thousands of Greeks are flocking to Turkish towns to shop for bargains. Turkey reopened a customs gate in the Aegean town of Akcay, a move expected to increase visitors from the neighboring Greek islands. Opened in 1954, the gate had been closed since 1999. However, a 40-euro exit fee imposed by Ankara on Turks going abroad has hampered the flow of tourism from Turkey to Greece. 
According to official data, Turkish exports to Greece are currently valued at 1.2 billion euros, while Greek exports to Turkey are 650m euros. The volume of trade between Turkey and Greece rose by 150 per cent between 2001 and 2004, statistics show. 
