08/05/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 08/05/13
Less than two months before Croatia joins the EU, former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader's trial is likely to be seen as additional proof that the country is serious about reducing corruption, officials and analysts said. 
The efforts to fight crime and graft are being carefully monitored by Brussels before the country formally joins the bloc. 
"I'm sure that at the end of the day it will be a success story for Croatia, for the EU and also for Southeast Europe. Sanader's case has shown that the rule of law in Croatia is unquestioned, that the institutions are functioning and the principles of the EU are embedded in our state and society," former Foreign Affairs Minister Gordan Jandrokovic said. 
"When it comes to fighting corruption in Croatia, [it] is not only the Sanader case. Other smaller processes are not so interesting to the public, therefore we know less about them. [The Bureau for Combating Corruption and Organised Crime] is doing its [job], and then it's all in the hands of judical ... how will this fight be effective, we'll see after final judgments," Nikola Kristic, president of Transparency International Croatia, told SETimes. 
In his third trial, Sanader is facing charges of selling a building to government at an inflated price. 
Together with former Agriculture Minister Petar Cobankovic and former MP Stjepan Fiolic, Sanader is charged with inflating the true sale value of the Fiolic building to the regional development ministry, which was then led by Cobankovic. 
The building was sold to Cobankovic's ministry for 11 million euros, which the indictment says was double the real price. 
Sanader is already serving a 10-year sentence for taking 500,000 euros in bribes from Hypo Bank in 1995 and another 10 million euros from Hungarian oil company Mol in 2009. 
The Fiolic case is based on roughly 5 million euros of damages to the government. Experts expect that in the event of conviction, this money will be returned to the Croatian budget. 
"Without the part of the judgment which orders that the money must be returned, the verdict would make absolutely no sense," Kristic said. 
Anton Filic, a member of Croatia's National Council for Monitoring Anti-Corruption Strategy Implementation, said that the public is tired of Sanader and his corruption scandals. 
"The public despises politics thanks to his corruptive behaviour, and it is now very difficult to be a politician in Croatia. When it comes to the fight against corruption, there is still a lot to be done. What is needed is a strong political will to fight corruption. Is there such will in Croatia or not? We can argue for days," Filic told SETimes. 
According to a survey by Transparency International Croatia, more than 60 percent of citizens believe that the country's accession to the EU will cut corruption, 27 percent think it will stay the same and 8 percent expect an increase. 
Dario Mrceli, a political science student from Zagreb, thinks that Sanader's case proved that there are no "untouchables" in Croatian politics. 
"The man was prime minister, the first official with the rank that high who was arrested. Sanader and his crew should serve as an example to all politicians who even think to behave like that. Crime doesn't pay. Of course, there is still a lot of things to be done, officials should strengthen the police, the prosecutors, they should encourage the citizens to report the corruption," Mrcelic told SETimes. 
 How can Croatia boost its fight against corruption? Tell us your thoughts in the comments below.  
