02/07/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 02/07/10
Xhavit Haliti, a senior government official and a member of the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK), confirmed he has talked to Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK) officials, about the possibility of forming a coalition in the next elections. 
In an interview with SETimes, Haliti said there are people in both parties with the reputation and mutual trust needed to begin the talks. 
 SETimes: Are there ongoing negotiations between your party and the AAK of Ramush Haradinaj for a possible party coalition? 
 Haliti: We [PDK] talked with the AAK and the party's parliamentary group, but we cannot negotiate on a possible coalition before the elections are held. 
We discussed the possibility of a coalition in the future elections. The AAK is still refusing the possibility of a coalition; publicly saying it has no interest in a coalition with the PDK. 
 SETimes: Were there any results, an agreement reached? 
 Haliti: No, there are no concrete results … but the relations between the main characters, from both parties, who had disagreements, have been smoothed over. 
 SETimes: Is a coalition between them possible? 
 Haliti: I think so. I don't believe there are animosities between the two parties. At the core, PDK and AAK have no animosities; there are disagreements within the respective parties. I think there is also discontent with one another related to whether to include the AAK in the government after the elections of 2007. 
 SETimes: If it happens, what would this coalition do for Kosovo? 
 Haliti: Kosovo would greatly benefit from the coalition because the same players, the same platforms would continue; however, the political scene would probably become more relaxed. If the PDK and AAK would form a coalition and agree on co-governance, the Kosovo government would gain a strong opposition in parliament, which would force the government to function better, be more transparent. For the rest, it depends on the readiness to approve relations and the government's readiness to fight organised crime and corruption in Kosovo. 
 SETimes: Is there any intention to have President Fatmir Sejdiu's Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) in opposition? 
 Haliti: No, the coalition would simply reduce tension between the two parties. I think this is a coalition of independence and it should continue as a coalition of more recognition, taking on new duties, with more transparency in decision making and law implementation. 
 SETimes: Do Haradinaj and the leader of your party support the negotiations for such a coalition? 
 Haliti: The coalition is interesting; we, as a party, would discuss and decide [the coalition possibilities] based on party interests and the results of an analysis related to the strength of each issue, [determined by opinion polls]. 
 SETimes: Do you expect these negotiations to continue? 
 Haliti: There is no reason not to. I believe that there is no objection to the relations between the PDK and the AAK, but there is a rigid position between the main leaders, the party chairmen, and it does not leave much space to move from this position. I hope it will change. 
