23/02/2005
By Miranda Novak for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 23/02/05
This year is a critical one for Croatia's largest pharmaceutical company, Pliva, which has been seeking to boost its position in the global economy. During 2005, Pliva will give up its exclusive right to sell azithromycin, the active ingredient in Sumamed, in the United States. As a result, the company stands to lose a significant share of its income. 
At the same time, the financial standing of the company has decreased by 38.4 per cent compared to last year. Rumours are circulating that the company is planning to lay off 600 workers, representing a third of its 2,800 employees. Following similar rumours in 2003, 500 of Pliva's employees were laid off. 
In December 2004, Pliva reported an operating profit of 136.3m euros and a growth in income of around 7 per cent. At that time, the company announced that there would be expenses in the first half of this year due to restructuring. Pliva has been seeking a buyer for its business headquarters building in the centre of Zagreb. It also reportedly plans to close one of its five production facilities, slash its research and development expenses by 50 per cent, and finance a smaller number of projects in the future. 
In the last quarter of 2004, Pliva's year-on-year profits were down by 50 per cent, while royalties from azithromycin dropped by as much as 11.4 per cent. One reason for the company's poor financial performance is that the company has so far created only one successful drug -- Sumamed. Since the 1980s, Pliva has not managed to develop any new drugs, and instead bases its performance on generic copies of other drugs. 
Pliva owes the bulk of its financial success to regular income from the sale of azithromycin to the American pharmaceutical giant Pfizer, which sells its own brand of Sumamed under the name Zithromax. Pfizer currently pays Pliva a little over $600 per kilogram of azithromycin. At the end of this year, however, other companies will begin producing azithromycin, and the cost of a kilogram will fall from $600 to between $100 and $200. Enormous losses for Pliva can be expected. 
Analysts agree that Pliva reacted too slowly to the imminent loss of its exclusive rights to manufacture and sell azithromycin, though media reports promise the company will be back in a big way with the development of a new cancer drug. So far this has not materialised, although Pliva has recently created a stir in the Croatian market by offering a substitute for Viagra.
