17/02/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 17/02/10 
Serbia's Interior Ministry launched an investigation Tuesday (February 16th) into allegations that the chief adviser to Bishop Artemije embezzled more than 7,000 euros from the church, according to the Belgrade daily Blic. 
The money -- donated to the Raska-Prizren Eparchy for soup kitchens in Kosovo -- allegedly went instead to support the luxurious lifestyles of the bishop's colleagues, including former State Bureau for the Protection of Cultural Monuments Director Gordana Markovic. 
The Serbian Orthodox Church leadership dismissed Artemije on Saturday, alleging serious financial abuse in his eparchy. Saying he had done nothing wrong, Artemije called the reasons for his dismissal political. 
The church said that while the bishop did not directly commit the alleged crimes, he was removed for not preventing the situation. The church Synod met last week to discuss Artemije's refusal to co-operate with a commission of bishops sent to investigate financial affairs at the Gracanica monastery, seat of the Kosovo eparchy. 
Eparchy of Backa Bishop Irinej said that Artemije's suspension will last until the investigation is complete. Although none of his eparchial rights will be taken from him, he will not have any control over the work of the eparchy. 
Artemije maintains that his dismissal came after several Western ambassadors talked with newly installed Patriarch Irinej in Belgrade. 
Highly influential Kosovo Serb associations backed the bishop, claiming that his dismissal "tears down one of the strongest pillars of survival of Serbs in Kosovo". 
The Serbian Orthodox Church and Artemije wield great influence among Kosovo Serbs. The church remains the only Serbian institution active in all of Kosovo, which declared independence from Serbia in February 2008. 
Artemije's past with the church has been rocky. He has been adamant in refusing to allow Kosovo authorities to rebuild destroyed Serb churches and monasteries in Kosovo. 
He said the churches could not be reconstructed "by those who had torn them down", thus sparking conflict with the church leadership, which wants the buildings rebuilt as soon as possible. 
The bishop also berated church authorities for abandoning the idea of filing a lawsuit against European countries -- with soldiers on the ground -- that failed to prevent Kosovo Albanians from burning Orthodox churches in March 2004. 
Artemije is extremely critical of Serbian President Boris Tadic's pro-European government, saying it did not work hard enough to keep Kosovo from declaring independence. 
