07/06/2013
By Miki Trajkovski for Southeast European Times in Ohrid -- 07/06/13
Analysts are expressing disappointment over the cancellation of the Southeast European Co-operation Process summit because of a disagreement over Kosovo's participation. 
The dispute arose when Kosovo, which is not yet part of the South East European Co-operation Process, did not receive an invitation to the summit that was scheduled for last week in Ohrid. Albania President Bujar Nishani refused to participate in protest and Macedonia President Georgi Ivanov cancelled the event. 
"Leaving Kosovo out of the summit is the result of pressure from Serbia, which is contrary to the agreements signed between Kosovo and Serbia, and more specifically violates Article 14 of the agreement Thaci-Dacic, signed in Brussels on April 19th," Nishani said. 
"This goes against the principle of building good neighborly relations as a precondition for European integrations. The representation of Kosovo in any regional and international initiative is done on the basis of equality and it is in the spirit of respecting the subjectivity and independence of each state," Arber Vllahiu, a spokesperson for Kosovo President Atifete Jahjaga, told SETimes. 
Vllahiu said that Kosovo built policies of good neighborhood and mutual respect and its inclusion in the regional initiatives would help to overcome the differences and the consequences of the past. 
"The Ohrid incident should be seen as an iceberg into the current situation of regional co-operation. There is no other option but the one of co-operation and trust among the countries of the region if they are to become members of the EU," Ramadan Ilazi, the executive director of Kosovo Peace Institute, told SETimes. 
Vlatko Cvrtila, professor at the Faculty of Political Sciences in Zagreb, told SETimes that bilateral and multilateral meetings in the Balkans would help create partnerships in the region, build peace and good relations. 
"These meetings should be viewed as progress for the region, because some lessons of the past we have already learned. Such regional initiatives can produce great results in the process of mutual support in the Euro-Atlantic processes," Cvrtila said. 
But Zhidas Daskalovski, a professor of international politics at the State University of Bitola, told SETimes that some countries' bilateral relations still need to be worked out. 
"In the Balkans there was, there is and there will be, regional initiatives for co-operation in many areas on economic and political plan. But in the Balkans are still bilateral problems that should be solved," Daskalovski said. 
Ivanov expressed dismay in cancelling the summit. 
"Unfortunately the old Balkan prejudices and complexes have been reinvigorated. Challenges are resolved through dialogue, not a boycott," Ivanov said. 
Cvrtila, however, is optimistic that the problems in the region will outperform the differences, and that Croatia will contribute after its membership in the EU. 
"Croatia's accession will bring changes in the region with the best way to avail its position in the construction of new mechanisms for better co-operation. Better regional co-operation is important for the region and for each country separately, which will intensify regional agreements and policies," Cvrtila told SETimes. 
 Correspondent Linda Karadaku in Pristina contributed to this report.  
 Was Albania’s president correct in refusing to participate in the conference without Kosovo in attendance? Tell us your thoughts in the comments.  
