28/02/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 28/02/12
Thousands of protesters demonstrated peacefully in front of Pristina government buildings on Monday (February 27th) against an agreement on Kosovo’s regional representation, which gives Kosovo a voice on the international stage, but with an asterisk. 
The protest, organised by the Vetevendosje movement, was monitored by an estimated 600 police officers. There were no arrests, but the rhetoric was fiery. 
The protesters, holding Albanian national flags, shouted slogans such as "Down with Thacism", "Down with Resolution 1244", "Against the footnote, for Kosovo a Republic", "No negotiations, self-determination", and "We give Thaci, we don’t give Kosovo". 
Albin Kurti, Vetevendosje leader, urged the crowd to take action, even if there are consequences. 
"The stronger we become, more in danger we will be. That means that in the coming weeks and months, we can be arrested and punished. But, even if we fall down 1,000 times, we will rise to our feet 1,000 times," Kurti told the crowd. 
Durmish Gashi, one of the protesters from Rahovec, told SETimes that the protest intended "to raise the awareness of the people to stop the negative trends related to the future of the Republic of Kosovo, paralisation of the functioning of Kosovo as a state and the negative consequences reflected in the economic development and the well-being of its citizens". 
"The resignation of the government has been asked because the government, without taking the consent of the parliament, without asking the people, has made and is making harmful compromises and with consequences for our future. It is better to have a resignation as a preventive measure now than to have a return of non-stability tomorrow. That is something the citizens do not want. The wounds of the war are still fresh," Gashi said. 
The agreement, reached in Brussels last week during negotiations between Serbia and Kosovo, gives Kosovo a seat at the negotiating table in regional recognition. 
The agreement recognises Kosovo*, with the asterisk to signify, "This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSC 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo Declaration of Independence." 
Serbia, which does not recognise Kosovo after four years of independence, agreed to the proposal in order to win support for its EU candidacy bid. Germany had blocked Serbia’s candidacy last year, citing tensions with Kosovo. 
Dragan Popovic, director of the Belgrade based Policy Centre, said he strongly believes that "both parties have troubles with internal forces which are against these agreements." He told SETimes "These forces include opposition parties, but also a significant part of social elites, media, analysts, even NGOs." 
Popovic said both the Serbian and Kosovo governments will try to present the latest agreements as a sort of victory for their countries, "which require [taking] some actions in the field, such as ... arresting Serbian police officers in Gnjilane". 
"This could be dangerous and provoke incidents. It will be clever that both governments explain to citizens all possible benefits and costs and honestly present that this is a compromise, which is key for the further development of both countries," he said. 
Kosovo police searched seven locations on Saturday and detained six people, all of them Serbs, in the Gjilan/Gnjilane area of eastern Kosovo. Police said they were attached to the Serbian Interior Ministry. After a weekend detention hearing, five of the suspects were ordered held for 30 days. One person was released. 
Serbian Interior Minister Ivica Dacic said that Serbian police officers were living near Gjilan/Gnjilane, but they were working in Vranje, within Serbia proper. 
Dacic called the arrests "provocations" by Pristina which "may thwart the Brussels agreement" and warned of reciprocity measures unless the situation was clarified within 48 hours. He "recalled that there are members of the Kosovo Police Service living in Raska, Nis and Vranje." 
Dacic also warned that "similar provocations can be expected in the coming days … aimed at destabilising the situation and collapsing all the agreements that have been reached." 
Kosovo analyst Ardian Arifaj, senior researcher and programme co-ordinator at the Kosovo Institute KIPRED, told SETimes that "the main factor of destabilisation in the region is the failure of Serbia to disconnect with nationalism and its non-constructive stance towards Kosovo." 
"Agreements that have been reached are not a result of the good will of Serbia, or Kosovo for that matter, but rather a result of pressure coming from the EU and US. Pristina is concerned that it is only Serbia that is being rewarded for the agreements reached in the dialogue," Arifaj told SETimes. 
He added that "the DS (the party of Serbian President Boris Tadic) might get the 'carrot' of EU candidate status while Pristina has yet to get anything positive from the EU. Pristina is definitely not treated equally by Brussels," he added. 
Protesters promised that the demonstrations would continue. 
"We protest against the agreement between Kosovo and Serbia, which defines that Kosovo will not be represented in the regional forums with its full name, the Republic of Kosovo, but with a footnote which degrades the political and constitutional position of Kosovo. Therefore, we protest against the strengthening of Serbia within Kosovo," Agron Limani, a protester from Prizren, told SETimes. 
Limani says the government does not stop making compromises damaging Kosovo in favour of Serbia, "therefore protests and demonstrations will be organised in the spring in order to remove this government and stop these compromises which damage the present and the future of Kosovo." 
Deputy Parliament Speaker Glauk Konjufca told the crowd that "the state and sovereignty are not made with negotiations with Serbia." 
"Entering negotiations means awareness and readiness to enter a process in which you will give up something. Freedom, democracy, statehood, sovereignty, identity, nation cannot be negotiated and cannot be traded," he said. 
Kosovo’s government issued a statement Monday night thanking those who protested peacefully. "The government of the Republic of Kosovo reiterates that the right to protest peacefully is guaranteed with our constitution and laws and as such, will always be respected by the democratic institutions of our state," the government said in a news release. 
It expressed at the same time "disappointment with the political, manipulative actions of the Vetevendosje movement, to get the citizens of Kosovo in protest, without hiding its intention to grab democratic power through the protests." 
