16/04/2012
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/04/12 
The severity of fuel emissions pollution in Serbia is prompting local and international efforts to encourage the use of energy efficient technology, biofuels and bicycling, with notable results -- but all involved agree more is needed. 
Serbia is the fifth-largest producer of carbon dioxide in Europe behind Albania, Bulgaria, Moldova and Ukraine. The International Fuel Quality Centre ranked Serbia 93rd out of 100 countries in CO2 emissions due to fuel's high concentration of sulfur, which pollutes more than other derivatives. 
"Introducing energy-efficient technologies to decrease fuel use at least by half per kilometer travelled is urgently needed," Jovanka Arsic Karisic of the NGO Central European Development Forum told SETimes. 
Arsic Karisic said Serbia must start working faster on developing energy-efficient transportation also due to EU accession requirements. 
Under EU energy policy, vehicles should halve emissions and double energy savings. 
"Fuel consumption for new cars is estimated to be reduced by 50% in 2030, compared to 2005," Bojan Kovacevic, deputy director at Serbia's Agency for Energy Efficiency, told SETimes. 
Serbia's public transportation is taking baby steps towards greater efficiency. It uses ten popularly termed "ecological" buses in Belgrade and six in Novi Sad, which run on clean natural gas. 
The buses are produced locally in the Vulovic factory in Kragujevac, and the producer has secured a contract to supply 32 of them. The government will subsidise the manufacturer in an effort to comply with the EU policy of having 20% of vehicles run on natural gas by 2020. 
Belgrade plans to buy another 280 double-length and 120 regular-length natural gas-powered buses, which will halve the public transportation system's fuel consumption, according to Aleksandar Antic, president of Belgrade's city assembly. 
"This is our contribution to the project to clean Serbia. We want to leave a cleaner Belgrade to the next generation, and that is why we buy eco-friendly vehicles and plant trees," Antic said. 
Another way to reduce emissions, experts say, is using biofuels, and more specifically biodiesel. The Victoria Group is the sole producer of biodiesel in Serbia but cannot sell its product. 
"The price of biodiesel has not been regulated, but if we are freed from the excise tax like in other regional countries and in the EU, biodiesel can be made available," Jelena Mitrovic, Victoria Group project manager, told SETimes. 
Serbia has the potential to produce 200,000 tonnes of biodiesel, and experts say it can be the main export of the future, as demand throughout Europe is high. Slovenia has shown interest in purchasing Serbian biodiesel. 
The conditions to produce biodiesel -- made of rapeseed, soy and sunflower oil -- in Serbia are ample, given the availability of crops and the presence of a massive oil industry. 
Serbia's law on excise fees does not apply to liquid fuels that are wholly manufactured from plant raw materials but does to derivatives which contain a low biofuel percentage. 
Manufacturers do pay excise however, because biofuel is never pure -- mixed with gasoline and diesel -- obtained by processing crude oil which is already charged an excise. 
"The projection is that by 2020, the share of biofuels obtained by processing oilseeds, soybeans, sugar and other biomass in the Serbian market will reach 2m tonnes," Kovacevic said. 
Three factories in Croatia and one in Bosnia and Herzegovina also produce biodiesel, but output is relatively low, amounting in Croatia alone to 40,000 tonnes. By contrast, Romania produces 3m tonnes. 
Beyond clean technologies and biofuels, civil society and international organisations are encouraging alternative modes of transportation. 
UNDP Serbia started a project in 2010 to encourage sustainable transportation in Belgrade, and it is gaining in popularity. 
"The overall project objective is to reduce the metropolitan emission in Belgrade by reinforcing the participation of cyclists in traffic and providing the policy framework for sustainable public transport development of Belgrade," Natasa Martins, UNDP portfolio manager, told SETimes. 
A 2010 UNDP survey showed that only 1% of citizens use bicycles to commute. 
An activist group Streets for Cyclists (Ulice za bicikla) took on the challenge. Cyclists, increasingly joined by their friends and enthusiasts, are cycling on the streets of Belgrade every last Friday of the month, promoting the need for ecologically-minded transportation. 
"Cycling is healthy and does not cause any pollution or noise, therefore it's the most efficient and sustainable mean of transport in cities," Milan Boric, a Streets for Cyclists activist, told SETimes. 
