25/05/2011
By Alina Radu for Southeast European Times in Chisinau – 25/05/11
Many women in Moldova are as capable of contributing to the country's political life as their male counterparts, but cultural and social barriers are holding them back. With local elections coming up on June 5th, a major push may be needed in order for the country to meet its Millenium Development Goal of achieving gender equality in politics. 
A new joint initiative, launched this month by Moldovan parliamentarians and the UN office in Moldova, aims to help in meeting that commitment. Around 200 female candidates will receive leadership training on how to run an effective political campaign. 
Trainers will travel to different regions of the country to hold discussions, answer questions and provide support. Organisers hope to increase the number of women local councilors and mayors from 13% to 25%. 
"The June local elections are the last chance for Moldova to accomplish the goal of promoting women in public and political life," said Liberal Democratic Party deputy chairwoman Lilana Palihovic, one of the few women in parliament. 
"There is no better way to get into national political institutions than through an experience of local administrative activities. We encourage women to start local and move further," added Palihovic, who launched the initiative together with Kaarina Immonen, the UN country co-ordinator. 
It will be an uphill climb. Women hold only 13% of district councillor seats and 18% of mayoral posts. At the upper administrative level the discrepancy is even worse. Only one woman serves in the government, and fewer than one fourth are in the parliament. 
In Hancesti, Ecaterina Bucur is preparing a meeting among local activists. 
"It is not easy to encourage women, because of stereotypes, migration and poverty. People are sceptical about trusting women. However, we have some women already in local and district councils and they are an important voice of local administration. They just need to be encouraged to go further," Bucur told SETimes. 
Daniela Terzi-Barbarosie, director of the Partnership for Development Centre, told SETimes that Moldova has a huge resource of women who are still ignored by men in politics. 
"Many women have great managerial and political skills, but nowadays they are sceptical towards politics. They do a lot of work at the local level, within political parties, but don't get further than local or district councils. When political party leaders -- and most of them are men -- set up lists for parliamentary elections, women are at the bottom of the list, in positions that have no chance," she said. 
Viorel Furdui, head of the Congress of Local Authorities in Moldova, confirms that women in politics tend to be concentrated at local levels. 
"Some local councils have 70% of women, indicating they have a good support there. But having only one women as head of district out of 40 districts, and only one woman in the government, shows that the National Administration should learn from local councils and offer more seats to women to create gender equality," Furdui said. 
Moldova's Millenium Development Goal calls for 25% of mayors to be women, as well as 25% of district council members and 40% of local council members. 
