22/06/2004
By Gelu Trandafir, for Southeast European Times in Bucharest - 22/06/04
Romania's ruling Social Democrats (PSD) suffered a major setback in Sunday's (20 June) second round of local and municipal elections, considered a bellwether for the general elections this November. The centrist Democratic-Liberal Alliance came out ahead in most of Romania's major cities and won the largest number of votes overall.
In Cluj, former Interior Minister Ioan Rus lost to the alliance's candidate, Emil Boc. Following Foreign Minister Mircea Geoana's defeat two weeks ago in Bucharest, Rus quit his cabinet post to commit himself totally to the campaign. Despite that all-out effort, and despite support from the Hungarian minority, he finished with 13 per cent fewer votes than Boc.
The ruling party was trounced in Bacau, considered a left-wing stronghold. Mayor Dumitru Sechelariu, a prominent local party baron, received only 37 per cent of the vote; victory went to the Romanian Humanist Party. In Iassy, however, the PSD mayor defeated the Democrat-Liberal candidate.
In Bucharest, the opposition easily won four of the five districts where a second round took place.
Prime Minister Adrian Nastase said he understood "the warning signs coming from the people". He asked all parties "to surpass the temptation of extending the campaign" and to co-operate for the benefit of European integration. Meanwhile, celebrations were under way at the opposition alliance's headquarters.
"It is the first time Romania has a factual alternative to the social-democrat party," said Traian Basescu, co-president of the alliance. Theodor Stolojan, who is expected to face Nastase in the upcoming presidential election, said the results of the local vote show that "PSD can no longer manipulate Romania".
The PSD now approaches the November election with its prospects clouded. It fell short of the Democrat-Liberal alliance in the overall vote Sunday, with unofficial early returns showing the PSD receiving 32 per cent to the alliance's 33 per cent. That puts the opposition in a strong position to come out ahead in the presidential and parliamentary races. If that happens, PSD would be forced to rely on smaller parties to stay in power. Two of the party's main pillars -- the "Cluj unit", which provided four ministers, and Bacau -- have suffered embarrassing defeats. Paradoxically, the main source of regeneration for the PSD seems to be its aging founder, 74-year-old President Ion Iliescu, who has announced plans to continue his political career.
