08/11/2010
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 08/11/10
For four nights, jazz fans flocked to three venues in Skopje -- Universal Hall, the Macedonian Opera and Ballet House and Club Hard Rock -- to catch some of the top acts in jazz and some they may not have heard before. 
 "We are searching primarily for musicians that haven't performed yet in Skopje, and that have actual projects, and mean something in the world of jazz. The number of those musicians in Europe is increasing every day," says festival director Oliver Belopeta. 
From its humble beginnings in 1982, the festival, has, over the years, attracted a growing list of jazz greats from around the world, including Ray Charles, Brazilian Girls, Marshal Allen, Cubanismo, BB King, Antony Braxton, Gotan Project, Al di Meola, DD Jackson, Sierra Maestra, Rabih Abou-Khalil, Toni Kitanovski, Youssou N'Dour and Maria Joao. 
Though jazz is one of the most avant-garde musical directions, it manages to attract an audience in a traditional environment such as Macedonia's. But even devoted fans in Skopje concede it's not for everyone. 
 "Jazz music is a type of music which can be tiresome if you do not like it," says fan Gordan Kalajdjiev. 
This year, Cuban composer and pianist Omar Sosa and his Afreecanos Quartet opened the festival in October 21st at Universal Hall. They combine Brazilian rhythm and Cuban effects with the old African sound and wrapped with original jazz urban. 
Up next were Italy's Maria Pia De Vito and her quartet. She sang the old Macedonian song Mamo koj chuka na porti (Mother, who knocks on the front door) in jazz rhythm, telling the audience she learned the song when she was only 16. 
Over at Club Hard Rock, Dutch saxophonist Yuri Honing took the stage with his band Wired Paradise. 
The saxophone is a replacement for a vocal, and often melts in with the other instruments. "Boldly synthesizing jazz, rock, dance and electronic music, it proves the allegation that jazz is not a style but a language. The style is not important; it is about communication with the modern times through music," Honing says. 
The festival does have a fair amount of European performers, as it is part of the European jazz network and the European forum of World music festivals. 
On the second night, the US band Larry Carlton Trio took the stage at Universal Hall. "Now I feel better," Colten said after his euphoric performance. Rounding out his trio were Travis Carlton on bass and Gene Koy on drums. 
 Following them on stage was Brazilian mandolinist Hamilton de Holanda with his quintet, playing his unique bandolim (Brazilian mandolin) featuring ten strings rather than the usual eight. 
Back at Club Hard Rock, fellow Brazilian Paula Morelenbaum wowed the crowd with her vocals. 
The big Saturday night show at Universal Hall kicked off in a big way, literally, when Belgium's Flat Earth's Society (FES) took the stage. The big band boasts 14 permanent members; 15 were there for Jazzfest. 
Up next that night was the Patricia Barber Quartet from the United States, with featuring Barber as the vocalist. 
A US band with Chicago roots, The Ethnics, featuring vocalist Nona Hendryx, took the stage at Club Hard Rock. 
Sunday night, it was the Opera and Ballet House's time to shine, with bands from Norway, land of the midnight sun. The first act was saxophonist Trygve Seim and accordionist Frode Haltli, an unconventional pairing of instruments, even for jazz. 
 "The tenor saxophone is exactly between the sound range of the accordion. Two instruments that are in the same scale have the potential to interfere and mix tones, making an unpleasant sound," observes Seim. 
Up next on the bill was Norwegian guitarist Terje Rypdal with the 17 piece Bergan Big Band. 
 Closing out the festival at Club Hard Rock was Aronas, which specialises in what it calls jazz punk, with piano virtuoso Aron Ottignon as frontman. 
 "European Jazz offers diversity and progress. This year, the accent is placed on all the performers, who in their luggage of experience, carry top honours and awards. The future of the Jazz Festival is guaranteed with such a trend of Jazzers and audience, whose number is getting bigger," says Belopeta. 
"I regret that there is no club in Skopje where the jazz audience can gather, a phenomenon that I cannot explain. Skopje has an audience that fills the halls, proven again by this year's Jazz Festival," notes music journalist Kostadin Shurbanovski. 
 Belopeta, the festival's director, says preparations are already under way for the big 30th edition -- a "special programme", as he describes it, which may include legendary guitarist Pat Metheny. 
