09/11/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 09/11/10
The EU flag, with its circle of stars set against a blue backdrop, is everywhere in Albania these days. So are signs marked with distances to the Schengen zone capitals. People have been placing them at the main crossroads in Tirana. Meanwhile, a poster at the Opera and Ballet Theatre -- once a symbol of pride for the communist regime -- announces "no visas required!" 
It's all part of the hubbub surrounding the EU's decision to approve visa liberalisation for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina. In Albania, a country that endured long decades of isolation under former dictator Enver Hoxha, the significance cannot be overestimated. 
Since the regime's fall, many have emigrated to other parts of Europe -- indeed, there is scarcely a family in Albania that does not have at least one member abroad. Up to now, though, most had to do so illegally. 
Hasan, an Albanian who once crossed the sea to work in Italy, stands in front of the big poster, thinking of his two brothers who made the journey with him -- and stayed. 
"I will go and visit them now any time I can. It's only a one hour flight," he notes. 
The EU's decision is expected to enter into force 20 days after it is published in the official gazette, and possibly in time for Albania's Independence Day, which is celebrated on November 28th. Whatever the exact date, travel restrictions will be lifted in time for Christmas. 
The good news, however, does not come without warnings. Bruised by problems surrounding visa liberalisation for Serbia and Macedonia, the EU is determined to enforce the rules and will strictly punish violators who remain in Schengen Zone countries for longer than the three months allowed. Brussels wants to make it clear that visa-free travel does not mean permanent residency or asylum. 
Great Britain and Ireland are not in the Schengen zone and visas still apply for them. 
Tanja Fajon, the European Parliament's rapporteur for Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina's visa liberalisation process, says the two countries have fulfilled the criteria. 
 
"We brought an end to the long queues at the consulates and tore down the walls that separated families and friends. The responsibility now is with all sides," she said in a press release. 
She also sought to allay concerns about illegal migration and crime. "People who wanted to leave the country have done so by now and we know that criminals do not have borders; visas are not a threat to them," she said. 
At home, the decision has temporarily accomplished the impossible -- uniting Albania's quarrelsome politicians. Though they agree on little else, all joined together in hailing the EU's move. 
President Bamir Topi called it "the most important day for the Albanians, after the proclamation of Independence and fall of communism". 
"It marks the biggest achievement for [Albanians'] freedom and dignity since the Iron Curtain fell down," agreed Prime Minister Sali Berisha. 
His main adversary, Socialist Party head Edi Rama, said it is time to put aside polemics and savour the moment. He also called on Europe to "tear down the visa wall" for neighbouring Kosovo, the only country in the region left out of the visa liberalisation process. 
