01/04/2013
By Menekse Tokyay for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 01/04/13
Steady economic growth and an increase in national income don't automatically translate into strong development in social indicators. 
That's one conclusion observers have drawn from this year's Human Development Index published by the United Nations Development Programme. The index measures many aspects of development -- including women's empowerment, literacy rates, and environmental conditions -- in order to provide a more rounded view of human progress than that offered by standard economic indicators. 
The index evaluates a range of criteria and offers countries a score expressed as a value between 0 and 1.Turkey's index figure for 2012 was calculated as 0.722, positioning the country 90th out of 187 countries and territories. 
The report called Turkey one of "less well recognised success stories" that is "reshaping ideas about how to attain human development." Turkey has registered strong economic growth and increases in income in recent years. 
However, Turkey has faced challenges translating its robust economy into social development. The country has a low female labour participation rate at 28.1 percent, while mean years of schooling stands at only 6.5 years. 
"The indicators in health and education have not been improved as much as the income in Turkey especially because the investments and improvements made in those fields can only bear fruit in the long term," Faik Uyanik, the programme's spokesman, told SETimes. 
Turkey hopes to grow its economy by 3 percent in 2013. Uyanik expects positive results in human development indicators in Turkey as long as the country maintains its economic progress and uses the benefits to address different social needs. 
"In order to have a sustainable human development record, Turkey should also develop regional development policies in order to overcome development inequalities among regions, which is a fragile aspect [of the situation] too," Uyanik said. 
On the index, Croatia ranked 47th, followed by Montenegro at 52nd, Romania at 56th, Bulgaria at 57th, Serbia at 64th, and Bosnia and Herzegovina at 81st. 
In Bulgaria, life expectancy is 73.6 years, while citizens spend approximately 10.6 years on education. Female participation in the labour market ranks comparatively high at 48.6 percent. 
Romania dropped six positions from the previous rankings, even as the country's index value jumped to 0.786, up from the last ranking. 
Mircea Chivu, associate professor at the faculty of sociology of the Bucharest University, told SETimes there were several factors to consider in assessing Romania's drop in the rankings. 
"Besides the economic factors, such as a decrease in purchasing power amid the austerity measures, there are also other non-economic factors lying at the roots of this six-position slide," he said. 
Enumerating reasons, Chivu said: "The low level of sanitary assistance which leads to the [high] rate of infant mortality, poorly developed social services, a decreasing quality of life partially due to the stress generated by the uncertainty of the job [market]." 
Chivu added that political factors were also part of the equation. 
"It also a situation which is related to the political climate, the good governance, namely the government's priority to ensure a decent living standard for the citizens, a better life quality. Unfortunately we do not see something like that," he said. 
Macedonia ranked 78th, its position unchanged since the last index. Among Balkan countries, only Bosnia and Herzegovina is placed lower. 
For some citizens, this ranking came as no surprise. 
"We simply can't compare ourselves to Europe. Medical services there are better, education is better. Salaries are incomparable," Ana Arsovska, a university student studying economics in the Macedonian capital of Skopje, told SETimes. 
"If you ask me, we are more in the ranking of some African or undeveloped countries when we talk about the quality of life." 
Still, Macedonia has made progress, boosting its life expectancy to 75 years. "Today Macedonian citizens can expect to live 5.2 years longer than in 1980 and to stay 2.5 years longer in school than in 1990," the report states. 
Macedonian citizens also have more money to spend today than in the past; the Gross National Product measured according to purchasing power has increased almost 40 percent compared to 1995. 
This year's UN report highlighted strong improvements in under-developed countries, many of which have registered strong economic growth, a decline in poverty and emergence of a middle class. More than 40 developing countries have unexpectedly realized greater human development gains in recent decades through sustained investment in education, social programmes, and health care. 
 Biljana Lajmanovska in Skopje and Paul Ciocoiu in Bucharest contributed to this report.  
 Is your country’s rating in the UN index accurate? Tell us why in the comment section below this story.  
