16/09/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/09/11
For the first time in Roma history, an internationally recognised institution -- the Roma Academy of Arts and Sciences (RAAS) -- was established in Belgrade this month. 
RAAS officials say the institution will collect and preserve the Roma's vast cultural heritage as well as study their social and scientific achievements around the world. 
"There is a tremendous need to research this people," RAAS President Rajko Djuric told SETimes. 
Djuric explained that RAAS aims to provide systematic and well-grounded interdisciplinary research to defend the Roma against various pseudo-scientific studies and racism. 
"[The latter has], unfortunately and shamefully, been a substantive characteristic of the so-called 'Gypsology' research which has re-emerged in recent times. It's an absurdity and has even been financially supported by certain European countries as well as various foundations and funds," Djuric said. 
Numbering about 12 million, Roma are the largest ethnic minority in Europe. Officially there are half-a-million in Serbia, but their true number is probably much higher because many lack personal documents. 
Given that the Roma are a nation without a state, they have had no institutions to protect their interests. In Serbia, the Roma only acquired minority status in 2002. 
"By establishing the academy we have an international institution that will be able to deal with all issues arising as a problem in the culture of our people," one of the RAAS founders and Belgrade Museum of Roma Culture Director Dragoljub Ackovic told SETimes. 
Partnering with educational institutions, the academy will organize an interdisciplinary scientific research of the Roma people from the perspective of history, culture, language, literature, art and society. 
In the vast diaspora, language is the main common cultural characteristic and the most important element of unity. That is why the RAAS pay particular attention to the Roma language. 
"There are eight university departments for Roma language in Europe, two of which are in Serbia, but the language is still developing because the Roma never had an opportunity to institutionalise it," Djuric said. 
In the recent past, some European countries like Spain and Hungary legally prohibited the use of Roma language, almost sending it to the verge of extinction in those countries. To rectify the situation Budapest University has opened a department for the study of Roma culture, while the town of Pecs has opened the only Roma high school in Europe. 
"It is good that Roma have such a high scientific and cultural institution. At a time of increased incidents of chauvinism and fascism, which have taken place in Serbia for over ten years, this institution will be better able to protect the Roma people," sociologist Milivoj Brajkovic told SETimes. 
Presently, there are 24 RAAS members from various countries which include some of the best known names in the arts and science: French film director Tony Gatlif, two-time Oscar winner Michael Caine, British historian Grattam Hakson, Finnish writer Veijo Baltzar, Heidelberg University professor Romani Rose and painter Bruno Morelli. 
RAAS is particularly proud of member Ilija Marinkovic -- a Vienna Musical Academy professor -- who was, at the age of 9, labelled "the wonder child from Serbia". 
The honorary RAAS members include such literary and political heavy weights as Gunter Grass, Salman Rushdie, Gabriel Garcia Marquez, George Soros, Helmut Schmidt, Vaclav Havel, Raj Zed as well as former Slovenian and Macedonian presidents Milan Kucan and Kiro Gligorov. 
