19/08/2005
(Blic - 19/08/05; RFE/RL, Radio B92, Beta, Reporters Without Borders - 18/08/05; FT, AP, Radio B92 - 17/08/05)
An international journalism association voiced concern Thursday (18 August) about press freedom in Serbia-Montenegro following Serbian Capital Investments Minister Velimir Ilic's attack on independent journalists earlier this week. 
"We are appalled at the way the minister and his aide insulted and threatened journalists in public," Paris-based Reporters Without Borders said in a statement. "If politicians react like this to questions they do not want to answer, it shows how fragile press freedom is in Serbia-Montenegro." 
On Monday, Ilic launched a verbal assault on reporter Ana Veljkovic and her colleagues at Belgrade-based B92 Radio and Television after she asked him about his role in the decision to drop charges against former Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic's son Marko. Instead of answering the question, the minister called independent journalists "sick" and "in need of psychiatric help". He also aimed abusive and sexist remarks at Veljkovic. 
Ilic's press adviser, Petar Lazovic, reportedly made a death threat against RTV B92's director, Veran Matic, while Ilic himself derided B92 as "robbers" and "anti-Serb" propagandists who have received money from US and EU NGOs. 
Matic announced Wednesday that he would file criminal charges against Lazovic. The minister's behaviour was discussed during the government's meeting on Thursday. In a brief statement to the state news agency Tanjug later that day, Ilic said he was sorry if his comments had insulted anyone at B92. 
According to Alex Lupis, the senior co-ordinator of European programmes at the New York-based Committee for the Protection of Journalists, Ilic's threats raised concerns that the government "could attack the media even more". 
"I think this sends a very powerful message to the media that the government will hit back sharply if any journalist tries to investigate sensitive political issues such as corruption, criminals and breaches of human rights. All these deviant phenomena remain hidden and unresolved," Lupis said Thursday. "In these conditions, society stagnates and cannot develop either politically or economically. I think that this is not in Serbia's best interests," he added. 
With Serbia-Montenegro preparing to enter Stabilisation and Association talks with the EU -- a prelude to eventual accession negotiations -- the democratisation process is likely to come under greater scrutiny. Meanwhile, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica has not yet commented on the withdrawal of criminal charges and the lifting of an international arrest warrant against Marko Milosevic. His government is believed to have played an instrumental role in earlier moves to annul criminal charges against the former Yugoslav president's wife and daughter. 
Many opposition politicians and observers say this is all part of a political deal between Kostunica and Milosevic's Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS), aimed at securing its continued support for Serbia's minority government. 
Government critics claim that judges, police officers and politicians from the Milosevic times are regaining influence, while reformers, who helped topple his regime in 2000, have been sidelined. 
"The situation is even more complicated than under Milosevic," Matic told Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty. "The world now views the government as democratic, but all key pillars of Milosevic's regime are being rehabilitated." 
