25/10/2006
(The Guardian, Independent, UPI, The Irish Times, Nine o'clock - 25/10/06; AP, AFP, Reuters, BBC, The New York Times, Irish Examiner, VOA, UPI, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Rompres, British Home Office - 24/10/06)
Unskilled Bulgarian and Romanian workers will not have an unfettered access to the British and Irish labour markets after their countries join the EU on January 1st. 
Under new measures announced by British Home Secretary John Reid on Tuesday (October 24th), a total of up to 20,000 low-skilled Bulgarians and Romanians will be able to work in the country's food processing and farming sectors as of next year. They will be able to work for six months at a time and will have no access to benefits or public housing. 
"Skilled Romanian and Bulgarian workers with the right qualifications and experience will continue to be allowed to come to the UK on work permits to take up specific jobs where no suitable UK applicants can be found," said a statement by the British Home Office. 
Citizens of the two Balkan nations also will be able to work in Britain if they declare themselves to be self-employed; students still will be allowed to take part-time jobs, if they are studying at an approved college. 
The new measures reportedly include fines of up to nearly 1,500 euros for Bulgarians and Romanians caught working illegally in Britain after January 1st. Employers who violate the rules also will face heavy fines. Shortly after Britain's decision was announced, Ireland followed suit with similar restrictions. 
Describing the British government's decision as "a bad investment" in the medium and long term, Romanian Prime Minister Calin Popescu Tariceanu voiced concern on Tuesday that it would fuel fear and reservations towards the EU. 
In Sofia, Foreign Ministry spokesman Dimitar Tsanchev said, "We will discuss the possibility of imposing reciprocal restrictions on Britain, as well as on other EU member states that restrict the free movement of labour. We think that such a decision will put us on an unequal footing with the ten member states that joined in 2004." 
Not all British officials support the limits. Geoff Hoon, the country's Europe minister, has warned that the move could both damage Britain's diplomatic standing in Eastern Europe and lead to tens of thousands of Bulgarians and Romanians joining the country's black economy. 
Others agree. "This sends out a message that says it is OK to discriminate against workers from Bulgaria and Romania, which may make these workers very attractive to unscrupulous employers who want scared, compliant labour who don't complain when they are not paid the minimum wage and won't call the authorities when they are forced to work in unsafe situations." the British daily Independent quoted Jack Dromey, deputy general secretary of the T&G union, as saying on Tuesday. 
Each EU member state is free to decide its policy on the issue. However, some officials in Brussels criticised London's decision. 
"We regret if member states which have opened for the ten are not going to open for Romania and Bulgaria," the AP quoted Katharina Von Schnurbein, the European Commission's (EC) spokeswoman for employment and social affairs, as saying. "We want to establish free movement of workers throughout the EU as soon as possible." 
