08/05/2012
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 08/05/12
Media freedom in Montenegro is under attack after a Podgorica court upheld a four-month jail sentence for journalist Petar Komnenic for libel, according to Montenegro and international media watchdogs, but some NGOs are working to remedy the situation. 
Komnenic was sentenced for a 2007 article in the weekly Monitor in which he alleged state prosecutors asked the police to illegally put a number of senior judges under surveillance. 
Judge Ivica Stankovic sued Komnenic for libel, and the court convicted him in February 2011. He was ordered to pay a fine of 3,000 euros, or serve four months in jail. 
Just months after Komnenic's conviction, the government passed a law decriminalising libel, listing it a civil offence. 
"Recent threats against journalists and physical assaults are examples that justice and freedom of expression in Montenegro are left behind," Veselin Radulovic, Komnenic's lawyer, told SETimes. 
Court trials and physical attacks have earned Montenegro the bottom position in the region concerning media. 
Currently, there are 15 active court cases against Montenegro journalists, but many more journalists have been fined. 
In 2011-2012, according to Reporters Without Borders, Montenegro ranks 107th out of 179 countries. Albania is ranked 96th, Macedonia 94th, Kosovo 86th, Bulgaria and Serbia are ranked 80th. Greece remained 70th, while Croatia is 68th, Bosnia and Herzegovina 58th and Romania 47th. 
In Komnenic's case, Radulovic claimed the conviction was based on false testimony by Judge Stankovic. 
Radulovic explained that the defence presented all evidence in court, including a copy of e-mail exchanges and a statement by an involved judge, but the file disappeared during the trial. 
Komnenic appealed, and the higher court advised the lower court to commute the prison sentence to community service, but the court ignored the suggestion and on April 18th confirmed Komnenic's jail sentence. 
"The judgment is final. The only way to correct it is a president's pardon," Radulovic said. 
Komnenic told the media that he did not intend to ask for a pardon nor pay the 3,000-euro fine since he was just doing his job. 
Montenegro's justice ministry said it respects the court's independence and the verdict, but there is a need to protect and promote speech and press freedom. 
"We view the Komnenic verdict in the broader context -- as one of the backlog cases which burden the judicial system and social environment on Montenegro's EU path. The ministry of justice and human rights has prepared a draft of a new Law on Amnesty, which gives the president certain discretion and the right to pardon a person without being asked for it," Ana Radusinovic, government spokesperson, said. 
That development notwithstanding, Montenegro Journalist Association president Novica Djuric said they have sent petitions to the authorities asking to protect journalists and media freedoms, to no avail. 
"This is the first time in Montenegrin journalism that a journalist will be sent to jail because of what he wrote," Djuric told SETimes. 
Recently, a Podgorica businessman threatened publicly Belgrade's daily Press correspondent Marko Milacic not to include him in an article, and his bodyguard assaulted Milacic. 
In March, investigative journalist Olivera Lakic was beaten in front of her home in Podgorica after writing a series of articles about the business practices of the Tara tobacco factory in Mojkovac, as well as the Montenegro Tobacco Company. 
"A founder and editor of a daily newspaper in Montenegro was killed, one was beaten, seven journalists were physically attacked last year, TV Vijesti vehicles were set on fire on several occasions, but none of these cases and crimes was solved," Mirjana Radovic of the Montenegrin NGO Human Rights Action told SETimes. 
The NGO proposed a new law to the government which would address the problem of journalists being prevented from carrying out their duties, based on the existing laws protecting public officials. 
"Instead of increased legal protection, the existing law goes against journalists," she said. 
The government has yet replied to the proposal, she added. 
