18/06/2013
By Cornelis van Zweeden for Southeast European Times in Dubrovnik -- 18/06/13
With EU accession only weeks away, experts are divided as to whether Croatia is winning the war on corruption. 
Petar Doric, an expert at Freedom House, an independent watchdog organisation, is not even sure the country has declared a war on corruption. 
"Yes, Croatia has made progress on the fight against corruption," Doric told SETimes. "Has this progress been sufficient? No, I don't think so." 
Doric said Croatian institutions, such as the judiciary, are not up to a task that is of herculean dimensions. 
"It is true that Ivo Sanader is in jail," he said, referring to the former prime minister, who was convicted on corruption charges. "But there should be 30 to 40 people behind bars." 
In its 2012 report, Freedom House rated Croatia's anti-corruption performance only slightly higher than the year before. The judicial system, according to the report, remained fraught with problems. 
One of them, said Doric, is the inability of the courts to deal with a huge backlog of cases. 
"Billions of euros went missing in the 1990s," he said. "At the current pace it can take decades to try the main suspects." 
Natasha Srdoc at the Adriatic Institute, a Rijeka-based think tank, has similar misgivings about the judiciary, but she said lack of capacity is not the only problem. 
"Croatia should not be allowed to become an EU member until it accepts foreign judges and prosecutors from countries with a strong rule-of-law tradition such as Holland, Britain and the EU," she told SETimes. 
Corruption is rooted to the 1992-1995 conflict, when the Croatian government and diaspora put up large sums to buy weapons. Much of that money was channelled through Hypo Group Alpe-Adria, an Austrian bank with close ties to the Croatian political elite. After the war, the elite reinvested in Croatia what was left. 
"They would buy land as agricultural land, and then turn it into building land," Srdoc said. "Prices jumped to 200 euros per square metre from 5 euros." 
Croatia's Ministry of Justice did not respond to requests for comment on its handling of corruption issues. But there are experts who say the country has turned a corner, and that some of the most alarming statistics should be put into context. 
According to a survey by accounting firm Ernst & Young, 90 percent of business managers in Croatia stated bribery was common practice in their country. Yet, only 40 percent said it happened in their own sector. 
Sasa Segrt, at Transparency International Croatia, an advocacy group, said the country is on the right track. 
"Croatia now has specialist courts for corruption cases with higher-paid judges," Segrt told SETimes. "That is starting to pay off." 
Segrt also noted the enhanced transparency in the country. She pointed to the publication of a list of 500,000 recipients of war pensions, some of whom had never touched a gun. 
"One of them was television director who had stayed in Zagreb throughout the war," Segrt said. 
Also, she said, public officials now have to declare their assets. 
"For judges these assets are not put online," she said. "But they are made available on request." 
Is Croatia making enough progress in eliminating corruption, or does more need to be done? Let us know what you think.  
