23/02/2007
By Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 23/02/07
The recent killings of five innocent passersby at a shopping mall in Salt Lake City, Utah, by Sulejman Talovic, 18, shocked Bosnians on both sides of the ocean. The community has strongly condemned the seemingly random shootings. 
On February 12th, police say, Talovic began shooting at the mall, killing five people and wounding four before he was shot dead by an off-duty police officer. 
The president of the Bosnian-American Society, Mladen Maric, fears that the tragedy may have negative consequences on the Bosnian community in the United States. "We have no idea why this happened and only time will tell how this tragedy will affect our community," he told Bosnian media. 
 "We don't have any details about what happened, but our community is very bitter about the whole matter," said Nizdara Pecenkovic, the president of the Union of Bosnian Students in Salt Lake City. 
Salt Lake City Mayor Rocky Anderson sought to reassure the community. Criticising those who have lashed out against Bosnian immigrants in blogs, e-mails and phone calls, he warned against jumping to "unjustified, outrageous conclusions" simply because a Muslim was involved. 
"Governor (Jon) Huntsman is hopeful that residents will see this as an isolated act by one deeply deranged individual and not use it to unfairly judge an entire community," said Michael Mower, a spokesman for Hunstsman 
Talovic's aunt, Ajka Omerovic, denied any religious motive for the crime. "We are Muslims, but we are not terrorists." 
News of the shooting spree shocked relatives in Talovic's home village in BiH. Redzo Talovic, a distant cousin who knew Sulejman from childhood, says he "came from a quiet and calm family, and I can't believe that he shot someone. I was in completely shock when I heard about it." 
"I know the entire Talovic family. It is hard to believe that Suljo's son killed all those people," said Omer Johic, a former neighbour. 
Suljo Talovic, the father of the gunman, spoke to the US media. "It is very painful. I have pain for my son. I have pain for every killed and wounded person. I am sorry for everybody." 
Sulejman Talovic's body is to be sent back to BiH for burial later this month. 
