24/02/2010
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 24/02/10
Stung by widespread criticism that the court is controlled by the opposition Social Democrats and is hampering reform, Macedonia Constitutional Court President Trendafil Ivanovski insisted at a press conference last week that the institution is doing its job. 
 "The constitutional court rejects the frequent reactions to its decisions," he said, adding that the complaints are without basis. "The court will continue to be consistent in its responsibility -- to protect the constitution." 
Debate erupted recently over the court's review of the laws on lustration and internal affairs. As a result of the review, nearly 1,000 police officers were denied retirement before the age of 64. 
In response, police union members became the latest group to organise a protest in front of the courthouse. They, and others, accuse the court of being under the thumb of the opposition Social Democratic Union (SDSM). 
Police Union leader Tihomir Klimovski said the demonstration was not an attempt to pressure the court. 
"It is the constitutional right of every citizen [to protest]," he said. "According to the constitution, all sides have the right to present arguments in their defence, more precisely in defence of the material that is subject of review by the court." 
The government of Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski has backed the officers. 
 "It is obvious that the police officers want to receive that which, according to the law on internal affairs, is their legitimate right. The court again brought a decision controlled at another place," Gruevski said. 
Critics of the court accuse it of being an obstacle to reform, saying it has stood in the way of government decisions at every turn. Recent court rulings have blocked moves to provide financial assistance to families with more than two children, and to women over 40 who receive artificial insemination. 
As long as "the judges' decisions are based on what they have been told by the party that appointed them to that position or according to their political beliefs, if not by political membership, we will have problems, protests, and damage for the state," Gruevski said. 
The majority of the court's nine judges were appointed by or during the SDSM's rule to serve a mandate of nine years without the possibility of being replaced. 
Vlado Buckovski, an SDSM parliament member and former prime minister, suggested that the Gruevski administration is meddling in the work of the court. 
"When Gruevski mentions the constitutional court four times in his last five statements, it has obviously become a nightmare for him," Buckovski said. He says the government plans to rein in the court this year through new legislation that redefines who is eligible to file cases there. 
Buckovski claims the government is preparing to reform the court this year by submitting changes through parliament aimed at more clearly defining who is eligible to file for legal action in the court. 
However, the ruling VMRO-DPMNE says Buckovski's statements are without basis and that no such initiative has been discussed within the party. MP Safet Nezri of DUI -- VMRO's partner in the governing coalition -- said his party has heard of no such plans. 
