26/12/2008
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 26/12/08
Unlike the Orthodox community in the former Yugoslav republics, Bulgaria, Greece and Romania celebrate Christmas on December 25th. 
For Bulgarians, the Christmas celebrations begin on Christmas Eve (Budni Vecher), when the whole family gathers around the table for a festive dinner. 
December 24th marks the end of 40 days and nights of fasting that begins on November 15th. Bulgarians still adhere to the requirement that none of the dishes on the dinner table on Christmas Eve include meat or animal products. 
There must be seven, nine or eleven dishes on the ritual table, with a lit candle at the centre. Walnuts and honey, as well as garlic -- a powerful weapon against any evil spirits that may be lurking -- are a must. The traditional menu includes a round loaf of bread with a coin inside, sour cabbage leaves stuffed with rice, white beans, dried red peppers stuffed with beans, dried fruit compote and a sort of pumpkin pie, called tikvenik. 
After the first stars appear in the sky, the eldest person in the family will sprinkle incense on the dinner table and in all rooms in the house. Family members receive pieces of bread broken off the same loaf. Whoever finds a coin will be the lucky one the following year. 
These days, in addition to the coin, the woman who bakes the bread will include a tiny dogwood branch, symbolising good health, and as many fortune slips as needed. The predictions in those fortune slips could range from just a word or two, such as "love", or "prosperity", to brief verses. 
Early on Christmas Day, in a tradition mainly observed in the countryside, young bachelors in traditional costumes, called koledari, walk from house to house singing carols and conveying wishes for health and prosperity. 
There are no restrictions on the Christmas meal, which typically is abundant and includes roasted pork, turkey or chicken and pastries. 
The interval between Christmas and Epiphany on January 6th is called "dirty days", as evil creatures, such as ghouls, vampires, demons and dragons, rule the night during this transitional period. It is, according to superstition, a risky time to go out after dusk or to get married. 
Bulgarians celebrate New Year's Eve with plentiful food and drink too. Again they will bake a coin and fortune slips inside homemade bread or banitsa -- a typical Bulgarian pastry -- that they have for dinner that night. 
Banitsa 
Ingredients:
Instructions:
Oil a medium size deep oven dish. Cover bottom with two sheets of filo pastry, sprinkle with soda water, then with melted butter and then with the egg-and-crumbled-cheese mixture. Repeat with the remaining filo sheets. The final layer is sprinkled with soda water and melted butter only and is cut into as many pieces as needed. Cook in a preheated oven (180-200 degrees C) for about 40 minutes or until the banitsa has become light brown. Cover with a clean piece of cloth, and leave to cool for several minutes. 
The banitsa can be prepared in different shapes and with other ingredients, such as spinach, leeks and pumpkin, and on any day of the year. The salty types are usually served with yoghurt or a glass of ayryan (yoghurt and water in 1:1 proportion). 
