29/09/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 29/09/11
A key protected witness testifying in the war crimes trial of veteran Kosovo politician and former KLA member Fatmir Limaj has been found dead in Germany, where he apparently committed suicide, officials said on Wednesday (September 28th). 
EULEX spokesman Blerim Krasniqi told SETimes that Agim Zogaj’s body was discovered in a city park. Zogaj was known as "protected witness X" in the so-called Klecka case. Limaj and nine other ex-members of Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) are charged with torturing and killing prisoners held at a detention centre in the village of Klecka in 1999. 
"German authorities are conducting investigations necessary to determine the circumstances of his death," Krasniqi added. According to the Washington Post, German police believe Zogaj hanged himself late Tuesday in the Duisburg, western Germany. 
Last week, a EULEX judge in the Pristina District Court ordered Limaj to spend a month under house arrest while awaiting trial. The war crimes case is being investigated under the supervision of a EULEX Prosecutor from the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office. Many of the charges were based on Zogaj’s witness statements. 
Attorney Bajrush Bajrami tells SETimes "The court will evaluate the current circumstances and decide how to proceed with it. It will be challenging now for the prosecutors without the main witness. " 
He says EULEX needs to investigate and review its witness protection system, even amid reports that Zogaj was a suicide. 
"In the past have been reports in which Kosovo and EULEX were blamed for a weak protection system, and this case will strengthen those allegations," he says. 
Political commentator Fatlum Sadiku agrees. "EULEX needs to answer some questions: why he was in Germany, whether he was under protection and why they delayed the process," adding that "witness protection systems require professionalism and to be carried out by a permanent institution, not EULEX, which has a limited time mandate," Sadiku tells SETimes. 
"Some can use this as an argument that in Kosovo, investigations on war crimes and other hot issue are difficult, not to say impossible, because witnesses are dead." 
He predicts that Belgrade will use the opportunity to call for an UN-mandated investigation into the Dick Marty report. 
"It is clear that Belgrade will raise this issue as an argument that Kosovo and EULEX cannot do investigations in sensitive issues," Sadiku says. 
In January, Parliamentary Assembly of Council of Europe (PACE) member Jean-Charles Gardetto said witness testimony is crucial to the process of uncovering the truth and achieving reconciliation. But in many cases, he said, witnesses have felt hesitant to come forward because they face the threat of retaliation. 
"In Kosovo, witnesses have been assassinated," Gardetto told the council. 
PACE urged the EU mission in Kosovo (EULEX) when it approved the Dick Marty Report to create a witness-protection programme, without which nothing can proceed. 
Bytyci says that with the death of Zogaj, the protection system has failed. 
"EULEX has repeatedly emphasised that witness protection is sufficient in Kosovo. This case represents a failure of justice, and the need to strengthen further the protection of witnesses," Bytyci says 
He says additional steps are required. 
"Apparently, things like house arrest or removal of the witness from the country is not enough. What we need is perhaps to remove the entire family of witnesses, or putting the witnesses in full custody of the police," suggests Bytyci. 
Limaj, an influential member of Prime Minister Hashim Thaci’s Democratic Party of Kosovo, is being investigated separately by EULEX for corruption. That stems from when he served as minister of transport and post-telecommunication between 2008 and 2010. 
