04/10/2004
By Athenase Papandropoulos for Southeast European Times in Athens - 04/10/04
Headed by former Portuguese Prime Minister Jose Manuel Durao Barroso, a new European Commission (EC) is scheduled to take office on 1 November. In an effort to end the economic stagnation that has plagued Europe, Barroso hopes to steer Europe away from the federalism of the previous Commission and towards free-market, liberal policies aimed at stimulating consumer spending and business performance. That could provide additional impetus for economic reform in candidate countries Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania, as well as elsewhere in the region. An emphasis on boosting competitiveness also bodes well for future EU enlargement. 
Many of the new commissioners have extensive experience in the private sector and will work to give more incentives to European industries. The appointments of Nellie Kroes from the Netherlands and Ireland's Charlie McCreevy have been welcomed by business, which wants to see the EU become more competitive in the international arena. Kroes will take up the competition post, while McCreevy -- credited with orchestrating Ireland's current economic boom -- will be the EC's head for internal markets. In an effort to stimulate business development, these new commissioners are likely to push for eliminating red tape and regulations. 
 Barroso is taking office at a time when three Southeast European countries are expecting to join the Union in the next few years, with several others knocking at the door. The region offers the promise of new markets as well as a labour force anxious for greater opportunity. Following several chaotic years in the early 1990s, Bulgaria has stabilised its economy, increased exports, privatised a number of state-owned behemoths and boosted productivity and competitiveness. Croatia has built a thriving tourist industry and has made significant progress in deregulation. Starting in 1997, Romania has embarked on massive structural reforms intended to shake off the remaining vestiges of the former command economy and transform the country's obsolete industrial base. 
 Such developments would seem to be very much in harmony with the EU's Lisbon Strategy -- an ambitious plan to make Europe the world's most competitive economy by 2010. Especially since the technological boom in the United States during the 1980s and 1990s, Europe has found itself lagging behind. Technological gains, combined with deregulation and laissez-faire, have made the US economy more and more productive and efficient, in turn fostering growth. By the Europeans' own measure, the Eurozone is 17 per cent less productive than the United States, and many individual countries post even lower rates. The US GDP is worth about $11.6 trillion for 2004; the 25 EU countries' combined GDP is an estimated $30.8 trillion. 
The new EC will be under considerable pressure to bring Europe's economy out of the trough of stagnation, slow growth, and ballooning deficit spending. The Lisbon Strategy aims to address areas such as unemployment, mainly by eradicating the economic inefficiencies and labour policies which hinder full employment. However, Barroso will face economic, cultural and political barriers that could hamper his ability to fully achieve his goals. Economically and culturally, Europe is unlikely to be ready for the reforms; politically, European leaders are reluctant to make potentially unpopular changes. The EC has often faced tough challenges in getting member states to enforce EU laws. The Lisbon Strategy itself was first formulated in 2000, only to be largely ignored for the next four years. Meanwhile, the gap between Europe and the United States has continued to grow, and Barroso now has less time than before to meet a mounting challenge. 
Furthermore, the Lisbon Strategy poses challenges for newcomers to the Union, which are already dealing with high unemployment rates and a lack of funds for research and development. It will be years before the European labour market is opened to them, and as a result the income difference between new and established member states will continue to be wide. Candidate countries Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania, meanwhile, are rushing to fulfil the minimum economic requirements in time for their anticipated entry into the Union in 2007. 
If his vision is to have any chance of success, Barroso will have to get tough with Europeans and their leaders, to convince them of the benefits of co-operating with his plan. He has very little time to make Europe's economy the world's most competitive -- and he had better move quickly. 
