21/04/2005
By Dusan Kosanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 21/04/05 
Belgrade and the EU signed a textile agreement in Brussels at the end of last month, establishing a quota-free regime for Serbia's textile exports to the EU, and allowing Serbia to multiply its textile export levels, which reached around 119.4m euros last year. The deal goes into effect on 1 July. According to Serbian International Economic Relations Minister Milan Parivodic, one of the signatories, it has great political significance. 
"We see a positive trend in Serbia's political and economic development. This should reflect on a better and more stable economic situation in Serbia," Parivodic said. 
The agreement, which Serbia signed independently, represents the first practical example of the double-track approach to Serbia-Montenegro, approved by the EU last year, under which Brussels is allowing the two constituent republics to pursue separate economic development paths as they move towards membership in the Union. 
According to Parivodic, Serbia's textile industry makes up about 7 per cent of the republic's GDP, while 70 per cent of Serbia's textile goods are exported to EU countries. Previously, the EU applied a certain quota regime for several types of textile goods from Serbia, but that regime covered only 25 per cent of exported goods. Under the new agreement, the remaining 75 per cent will also be exported to the EU free of customs barriers. 
The local textile industry can now compete on level ground with neighbouring countries, the minister said. "It is a good message, and I believe that third-party finishing jobs are the real thing for this market. We cannot produce textiles and compete with Bangladesh, Pakistan, India or China, but we can compete with ready-made apparel -- that is our competitive edge. This is where I see a chance provided by the agreement, which should be an engine for kickstarting the textile industry," he said. 
It is estimated that Serbia's textile industry could reach the 1991 export and third-party manufacturing levels of $1 billion in only a few years, through co-operation with the EU. To accomplish this, Serbian textile producers must find serious partners and resume old business ties. It will be up to the management of individual factories to decide how best to take advantage of the opportunity presented by the agreement. 
Many economic analysts believe that Serbia has the potential to attract significant foreign investments in its textile sector, as production continues to move from Western Europe to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, where wages are lower. At the same time, the living standards of those employed in the textile industry are expected to rise. Serbia's textile sector employs around 100,000, which means that as many as 300,000 people depend on the industry. 
