29/01/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 29/01/07
Macedonia should get a date for the start of EU membership negotiations in the first half of 2008, when Slovenia holds the rotating EU presidency, Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Jansa told the European Parliament in Strasbourg last week. He was discussing the priorities of the next three EU presidencies, which will be held by Germany, Portugal and Slovenia. 
"Slovenia will try to help this candidate country to get a date," Jansa said. He stressed, however, that progress depends on Macedonia meeting the conditions set by the EU. 
German Chancellor Angela Merkel was more reserved than her Slovenian counterpart, saying she didn't believe one could definitely say what the anticipated date for Macedonia would be. 
"Any country should necessarily meet the criteria and preconditions," Merkel said. "Clearly, Slovenia will advocate for Macedonia." 
Slovenian Foreign Minister Dimitri Rupel confirmed Jansa's statement during a recent visit to Macedonia. Rupel said defining a date for negotiations for Macedonia's membership would be one of the main priorities of Slovenia during its presidency. At the same time, he said, the Macedonian government should not sit idle, but rather should pursue the necessary reforms. 
Reactions in Macedonia have been mixed. While some had hoped to obtain a date this year, the statements from Ljubljana are being seen as evidence that accession negotiations will not start before autumn 2008. 
The Slovenian statements have dashed Macedonian hopes, said the daily Utrinski Vesnik. Radmila Sekerinska, leader of the opposition Social Democrats, has repeatedly criticised the government for not winning an earlier date. 
However, the government sees Jansa's announcement as extremely positive. For the first time, someone has made a concrete statement about the start of negotiations, says Deputy Prime Minister in Charge of European Integration Gabriela Konevska-Trajkovska. 
In her view, the former government had unrealistic expectations. 
Many analysts say the timetable has been slowed because reforms are not proceeding fast enough. Public disappointment stems from comparisons with Croatia, which signed its Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU after Macedonia did. 
With it membership negotiations started, however, Croatia is far ahead of its fellow candidate. 
