13/10/2008
(B92 -- 09/10/08 - 13/10/08; Serbian Government - 11/10/08; Reuters, Bloomberg, DW, VOA, Beta, Blic, Makfax - 10/10/08; AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, BBC - 09/10/08)
Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic said on Saturday (October 11th) that his country's co-operation with Montenegro in economic and other spheres will not come to a halt, despite the current setback to their diplomatic relations. 
 His remarks followed Montenegrin recognition Thursday of Kosovo's independence, in spite of Serbia's opposition. A furious Belgrade gave Montenegrin Ambassador Anka Vojvodic 48 hours to leave Serbia. 
Cvetkovic told reporters Saturday that Belgrade's response was part of his country's "arsenal of diplomatic measures" which do not constitute "any form of repression" and are not targeted at Montenegro's citizens. 
Announcing its decision on Kosovo, Montenegro stressed it was not acting "against Serbia". The two countries co-existed in a loose state union until Montenegro's independence referendum in May 2006. 
 "Montenegro has never and will never do anything against Serbia," Montenegrin Foreign Minister Milan Rocen said on Thursday. 
A day earlier, Montenegro was among the 77 UN General Assembly members that supported a Serbian resolution demanding that the International Court of Justice rule on the legality of Kosovo's independence. 
Serbian Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremic told Belgrade-based B92 that Podgorica's swift reversal of its own position prompted Belgrade's sharp response. "We have to react strongly in order to stop a potential wave of new recognitions," he added. 
Regardless of the Montenegrin government's decision, talks on dual citizenship between the two countries will continue, Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Ivica Dacic said on Saturday. 
"We will make sure that citizens who acquired Serbian citizenship do not lose the Montenegrin one in the process," he said, but added "Montenegro is the last state in the world that should have recognised Kosovo." 
Kosovo's leaders welcomed Montenegro's decision. Prime Minister Hashim Thaci described it as a step towards strengthening "peace, stability and regional co-operation". 
 His words echoed a similar statement from US State Department spokesman Sean McCormack, who said such steps would facilitate the region's integration in Euro-Atlantic institutions. 
Montenegro and Macedonia brought the tally of countries that have recognised Kosovo to 50, leaving Bosnia and Herzegovina as the last hold-out among former Yugoslav republics. 
Meanwhile, pro-Serb opposition parties in Montenegro plan to demonstrate Monday night against the government's decision on Kosovo. 
