26/03/2010
(FT, Bloomberg, DPA, Euronews, ABC News, BBC, EurActiv, Euobserver - 26/03/10; AP, Reuters, AFP, FT, Euobserver, EurActiv, ANA-MPA, Spanish EU presidency - 25/03/10)
The leaders of the 16 EU nations using the euro agreed late Thursday (March 25th) on a potential aid package for Greece, including a combination of bilateral loans from eurozone states and financial assistance from the IMF. 
The deal -- brokered by Germany and France at the start of a two-day EU summit in Brussels -- would take effect if Greece is unable to obtain loans in the financial markets. 
"It's an extremely clear political message," said EU President Herman Van Rompuy, who chaired the meeting of eurozone leaders. "It's a mixed mechanism but with Europe playing the dominant role. It will be triggered as a last resort." The aid mechanism needs the support of the other countries in the 27-member Union. 
While an EU statement on the accord mentioned no specific figure, the assistance package would reportedly total up to 22 billion euros. Two-thirds of the funding would come in the form of co-ordinated bilateral loans from eurozone countries, with the IMF covering the other third, according to French President Nicolas Sarkozy. 
The crisis is the most severe in the 11-year history of the 16-nation euro club. Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou's cabinet inherited a 2009 budget deficit of 12.7% of GDP, more than four times the limit for eurozone members. The nation's public debt is expected to hit 290 billion euros this year. 
Amid concerns about the country's ability to refinance loans of about 20 billion euros that mature by the end of May, the interest rate Greece is charged for borrowing on the international market has risen to over 6%. This is above the level paid by other eurozone member states. 
 Greek officials welcomed Thursday's deal, which Papandreou called "very satisfactory". 
"Europe has taken a big step in the face of a big challenge," Papandreou told reporters after talks in Brussels. 
Petros Christodoulou, head of the Athens-based Greek debt agency, said the contingency plan "wipes out the risk of default, the refinancing risk and raises the credibility" of the austerity measures adopted by Papandreou's government in recent months. 
The accord includes tough conditions, said to have been imposed by German Chancellor Angela Merkel. Berlin has consistently opposed any direct financial assistance from its government while calling for IMF involvement. 
According to a statement issued by the Spanish EU presidency on Thursday, each eurozone country "will contribute an amount proportional to its gross domestic product and its total population". 
Furthermore, any decision on a bilateral loan will have to be proposed by the European Commission and the European Central Bank (ECB), which will then require the unanimous approval of all 16 eurozone members. 
Any such loan would be provided at market interest rates, as opposed to the average rate for the euro area. 
The agreement reportedly calls for tougher internal rules to ensure that no member of the eurozone repeats the mismanagement at the root of Greece's fiscal nightmare. 
ECB head Jean-Claude Trichet -- initially quoted as describing the IMF's involvement as "very, very bad" -- later said he was satisfied with the deal, which came a day after eurozone member Portugal's sovereign debt rating was downgraded by Fitch. 
