08/03/2011
By Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 08/03/11
The long-heralded government reconstruction became reality Sunday (March 6th), when Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic announced he will reduce the number of ministers by seven, to a total of 21. 
"It is not [only] a question of personnel changes but also of structural changes in the government," Cvetkovic said. 
A number of ministries are being merged to bring about the reduction. That means the cabinet will no longer have separate ministers for trade; mining and energy; telecommunications; science; human and minority rights; religion and the national investment plan. 
Cvetkovic will himself take on the duties of finance minister in addition to heading the cabinet. 
The government, Cvetkovic said, will work to keep Serbia on track for EU integration and attract new foreign investments. It also aims to bring about higher employment and better living standards, he added. 
One of the first measures announced by the new government is credit relief. 
"All those who have credits with a maturity of longer than one year will be able to get a grace period of one to two years," Cvetkovic said. "Within two years people will be earning more and paying off the loan will be easier." 
Critics are sceptical, saying the cabinet changes are mostly cosmetic because the seven ministries were not eliminated, but simply combined with others. For example, the commerce department is now attached to the agriculture ministry, while the science ministry is part of the education mnistry. 
The government will thus remain cumbersome even though it looks smaller on paper, opponents say. 
"Reducing the number of ministries can not lead to true rationalization and savings. Costs reductions are only by the amount of ministers' salaries. It is a totally insignificant savings," economic analyst Branko Pavlovic told Danas. 
Aleksandar Stevanovic of the Center for Free Market agrees. "Of course, this will not lead to rationalization, savings or to improved quality work in the economic sector. It only means that two bad ministries merge into one bad ministry that will continue to do poorly," he said. 
Cvetkovic disagrees, vowing that the changes will make for a more efficient and unified government. 
The Serbian government continues to be the region's largest. Despite the overhaul, the state administration will continue to maintain 28,000 employees, nearly four times more than in 2000. 
The government announced potential changes since the end of last year but it took time for the coalition parties to agree on how to implement it. That is largely because ministries operate on party lines, with each member of the coalition anxious to protect its turf. 
