23/02/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 23/02/06
Jose Manuel Barroso's tour of the Western Balkans last week was the first to the region by a European Commission (EC) president. During stops in Croatia, Serbia-Montenegro, Macedonia, Kosovo, Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina, he outlined a vision of stability and prosperity, seeking also to reassure countries in the region about their EU prospects. 
Accompanied by EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, Barroso came to the region to support efforts by SEE countries to move closer to the Union. It is crucial, he stressed, that countries build political and economic co-operation in the pursuit of this shared goal. The future of the Balkans is in Europe, Barroso stressed. 
Barroso and Rehn made their first stop in Zagreb. Addressing the Croatian Parliament, the EC president described Croatian-EU relations as having entered a new phase. 
"We have started negotiations and can already estimate Croatian improvement in adopting of EU legislation. In other words, the real business has just started," Barroso said, adding that further progress will depend on the pace of adopting and implementing the acquis communitaire. 
As the accession process proceeds, parliament's role will increase, Barroso said. Negotiations will raise issues that spark concerns among Croatia's citizens, and it is up to the country's political leaders to address those concerns, he noted. 
Croatia should not forget about key political criteria, Barroso added. These include ensuring minority rights and the return of refugees, prosecuting war crimes indictees fairly, enacting judicial reform, and waging an effective fight against corruption. 
In addition, Barroso said, Croatia must strengthen its economy, increase the role of foreign investments and prepare to face a more competitive market. He backed Prime Minister Ivo Sanader's proposal for an expansion of the Central European Free Trade Agreement as an alternative to a previous EU proposal for establishing a free trade zone. 
Following the visit by Barroso and Rehn, Croatia has received positive signals about its path to EU accession. This week, Luxembourg Foreign Minister Jean Asselborn traveled to Zagreb, where he and counterpart Kolinda Grabar-Kitarovic discussed bilateral co-operation and harmonising Croatian legislation with EU requirements. 
