12/01/2010
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 12/01/10
A proposed Law for Free Legal Assistance -- which would provide access to representation for all Macedonian citizens -- was unanimously passed in parliament late last year with 62 votes. 
The legislation is in line with EU law and standards. 
The law now deems Macedonian citizens of permanent residency whose net worth does not exceed 1,650 euros -- a value of five times the national average monthly salary -- eligible to receive free legal assistance. 
Also eligible are welfare recipients; the disabled, whose pensions are the only source of income; single parent families with minor dependents; and retirees with low-level pensions who also care for others, and the homeless. 
Another category includes those seeking asylum in Macedonia and legal aliens. 
Free legal assistance includes cases involving rights protection in areas of social, health, retirement and disability insurance, as well as the protection of children, property law and labour relations. 
An estimated 79,000 pensioners may be eligible for the benefit, in addition to more than 50,000 welfare beneficiaries and 30,000 recipients of other kinds of government assistance. 
 If a case meets the law's criteria, Macedonia's ministry of justice will provide assistance both before and during trial. 
Pre-litigation assistance will be provided by officials across 34 regions of the country, as well as by authorised citizen associations. Attorneys and mediators offering help will reportedly be compensated by the government for about 30% of their normal fees. No one associated with the programme will be allowed to advertise their services. 
The programme will be publicised by the Ministry of Justice, together with the Macedonian Bar Association, the notary chamber and others. 
 "I support it because it includes a human aspect and makes justice accessible to those who can't cover the costs for representation in court," said attorney Petar Schilegov. 
