20/12/2012
By Linda Karadaku and Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Pristina and Belgrade -- 20/12/12
Kosovo and Serbia's shared border management duties are continuing amid a dispute over customs duties that are being charged on goods entering Kosovo. 
The two sides began implementation of the integrated border management agreement on December 9th, with representatives staffing crossings at Jarinje and Merdare. Crossings at Brnjak and Dheu i Bardhe will open by the end of the month. 
While Pristina appears to be pleased with how the crossings are being managed, Belgrade and some Kosovo Serbs are objecting to the customs duties being assessed to goods entering Kosovo from Serbia. 
Krstimir Pantic, head of the Northern Mitrovica municipality, told SETimes that that Serbs promised they would not have to pay customs duties on goods staying in northern Kosovo, but EULEX is forcing them to do so. 
Kosovo Serbs are seeking answers from Belgrade and are threatening to block the Jarinje crossing if the customs duties continue. 
Rados Petrovic, a businessman from Mitrovica, told SETimes that businesspeople from northern Kosovo "agreed to keep paying VAT and other fees to the Republic of Serbia." 
Serbia Prime Minister Ivica Dacic said on Tuesday (December 18th) that he would no longer negotiate with Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci and EU High Representative Catherine Ashton unless the agreement that no customs duties will be paid on goods remaining in northern Kosovo was observed. 
The Serbian prime minister said he was "absolutely unhappy with what is happening right now" concerning the border management agreement. He added, however, that Serbia's EU integration depends on the talks with Pristina, and he will soon decide whether to resume the dialogue in Brussels. 
The successful management of the crossings is important to both countries as they attempt to keep a tenuous peace. For Kosovo, the border represents a normalisation of relations with Belgrade four years after declaring independence, and is another step toward international recognition and acceptance. 
Serbia does not recognise Kosovo independence, but is attempting to win the favour of the EU as it works towards European integration. 
According to the agreement reached last year, the parties do not display state symbols at the border crossings and they have a balanced presence in numbers and vehicles. Border posts are jointly managed by Kosovo and Serbia's police and border personnel, with European officials from EULEX present as well. 
"All border crossing procedures are being realised in conformity with the legal authorisations and with the agreement," Baki Kelani, a Kosovo police spokesperson, told SETimes. 
Fisnik Rexhepi, leader of the technical teams for the agreement and adviser to Kosovo Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi, said everything is going as foreseen. 
"Co-operation is at the right level and there have been no difficulties. The [agreement] aims to facilitate the movement of the citizens and goods in both countries. The implementation of the agreement will, at the same time, contribute to the prevention and fighting cross-border crime and smuggling in particular," Rexhepi told SETimes. 
Kosovo analysts believe that both states benefit from the border management plan. "It is an important part and a precondition for EU integration," Hysni Fejza, executive director of the Kosovo Institute for Peace, told SETimes. 
