21/05/2012
By Lily Lynch for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 21/05/12
Alphons Orie, presiding judge at the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in The Hague, said that judges would analyse the "scope and full impact" of the prosecutorial error in order to set a new trial starting date "as soon as possible." Ratko Mladic's defence is requesting a trial suspension of six months to process the 7,000 pages of undisclosed material. 
The documents concern witnesses who were to be called to testify prior to the court's summer break in July. 
Prosecutors acknowledged the clerical error in which they failed to upload thousands of documents to an electronic database, and have not opposed a temporary trial suspension. 
Mladic faces 11 charges of war crimes, including genocide, over the 1992-1995 Bosnian conflict. He was the commander-in-chief of the army that committed numerous atrocities in a campaign to drive Croats and Bosnian Muslims from an area they considered Serbian territory. 
Mladic is accused of orchestrating and ordering the Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) in 1995, in which an estimated 8,000 Muslim men and boys were killed, as well as the 44-month siege of the BiH capital, Sarajevo, which left nearly 12,000 people dead. 
While Mladic has refused to enter a formal plea, he denies any wrongdoing. In the two days of court proceedings prior to the postponement, the prosecution submitted evidence alleging that Mladic had exercised command control over the massacre at Srebrenica. 
The prosecution also presented several video clips, including footage of Mladic telling the camera "it is time to take revenge upon the Turks," a reference to Bosnian Muslims, as well as the filmed execution of Dino Salihovic, a 16-year-old Bosnian Muslim who was shot along with several other teenagers at Srebrenica. 
The abrupt suspension of the trial has prompted some to question the credibility of the court, which has been criticised for its slow proceedings. It has also frustrated victims eager for closure. 
As Ljuljeta Goranci-Brkic of the Nansen Dialogue Centre, a Sarajevo-based NGO that promotes interethnic reconciliation in BiH told SETimes, "Some people are really disappointed. They expected swift punishment. In BiH there is the perception that prisons in The Hague are like hotels, and that while Mladic awaits punishment, he'll have a better life than most people here." 
Court spokesperson Nerma Jelacic told SETimes that it is uncertain when the trial would resume. 
"We do not have a date yet, but the chamber met with both the defence and the prosecution following Judge Orie's announcement of the suspension. They are currently reviewing the information presented and will make a decision about the new trial start date in due course," she said. 
Meanwhile, the Mladic trial has received little media attention in Serbia, and the topic was largely absent from the country's presidential race. 
In previous years, Tomislav Nikolic, a nationalist who is now the president of Serbia after beating Boris Tadic in the second round of elections on Sunday (May 20th), criticised Tadic for sending war crimes suspects to The Hague. However, Nikolic's Progressive Party has sought to reform itself in recent years. 
"Serbia should remain committed to all of its international obligations regarding the functioning of the ICTY. The tribunal, on its part, must be immune to political influence if it wants to serve the purpose of delivering justice and enabling reconciliation to divided communities. Only that way can it serve its true purpose," Marko Djuric, of the party's main board, told SETimes. 
Tadic, who as president last May announced Mladic's capture in the Serbian village of Lazarevo, has failed to fulfill his promise to go after all parties who aided the former commander during his 15 years on the run. 
While Serbian politicians remain largely silent on Mladic's alleged crimes, the Youth Initiative for Human Rights in Serbia is organising a festival entitled Days of Sarajevo in central Belgrade set to begin on Tuesday, to honour that which was lost in the destruction by Mladic's troops. 
"All profits from the festival will go towards the reconstruction of Sarajevo city hall, and the cultural heritage of Sarajevo destroyed by the siege," Dusan Lopusina, media co-ordinator for the organisation, told SETimes. 
