05/05/2010
 (Euobserver - 12/03/10; European Voice - 11/03/10, EurActiv - 08/03/10; AFP, The Irish Times, Reuters, Europolitics, EurActiv, Euobserver - 04/03/10; European Commission, AFP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, The New York Times - 03/03/10)
EU leaders will meet in June to finalise a ten-year economic action plan for EU member countries. Proposed by the European Commission (EC), the blueprint -- dubbed Europe 2020 -- aims to spur growth and employment, and sets five measurable targets. 
EC President Jose Manuel Barroso says implementing the strategy is vital to recovering from the global economic and financial meltdown. 
"Europe 2020 is about what we need to do today and tomorrow to get the EU economy back on track," Barroso said. "The crisis has exposed fundamental issues and unsustainable trends that we cannot ignore any longer. Europe has a growth deficit which is putting our future at risk." 
But some analysts are unimpressed. They question the way the five targets were picked, as well as the availability of adequate tools to ensure their implementation. 
The targets cover employment, research and development, the environment, education, and poverty levels. Under the plan, the employment rate of the EU population aged 20-64 should be increased to 75% by 2020, up from 69% today. 
 Investment in research and development should be increased to 3% of the EU's GDP. 
The blueprint also calls for meeting the bloc's climate and energy goals by reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 20% of 1990 levels. The share of renewable energy sources in final energy consumption would be raised to 20%, and energy efficiency should be improved by the same percentage. 
By 2020, the share of school drop-outs should be no more than 10%, down from 15% today. The number of people in their early 30s with a degree or diploma should grow to at least 40%, up from the current 31%. 
Lastly, the strategy calls for reducing the number of Europeans living below the poverty line by 20 million people. This amounts to a 25% decrease from the current level of 80 million people. 
 But will the plan be able to deliver on its objectives? Analysts at the European Policy Centre, a prominent Brussels-based think tank, are pointing to what they see as key vulnerabilities. 
"The proposed governance mechanism is still predominantly 'soft', relying on benchmarking, monitoring and recommendations," the organisation's chief executive and chief economist Hans Martens and Fabian Zuleeg said. "Structural reform of public sectors, and especially public services, should have had a more prominent role." 
Zuleeg cited the "unclear rationale for targets" as one of its main weaknesses. He criticised the plan, saying that it is "too dependent on member-state political will and policies" and that "public finance and public sector reform challenges are not integrated." 
Some parts of the EC plan have triggered disagreement among bloc leaders as well. During initial discussions in March, some reportedly expressed opposition to the proposal for poverty reduction. 
"We feel that the poverty criterion doesn't make sense," the EUobserver quoted Danish Prime Minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen as saying. 
EU leaders agreed that promoting social inclusion, in particular through reducing poverty, is a shared objective. But, they said, "Further work is needed on appropriate indicators. The European Council will revert to this issue at its June 2010 meeting." 
The European Council has already started discussing details of the blueprint, presented by the EC on March 3rd. 
