09/06/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 09/06/11
On June 2nd, residents of Istanbul woke up to comparatively quiet streets, absent the incessant jingles that have streamed from political parties' campaign vans for the past several months. The respite can be attributed to Turkey's "election ban", which prohibits certain types of political campaigning during the ten days prior to an election. 
This slight reprieve in a campaign season full of big promises, ugly scandals and harsh rhetoric offers an opportunity to step back and look at the strategies of the two parties expected to dominate the next parliament: the incumbent Justice and Development Party (AKP) and its major opposition, the People's Republican Party (CHP). 
Bogazici University political science professor Hakan Yilmaz explains that because political parties pick their own candidates, the Turkish electorate only has the right to choose parties, not people. Thus, he says, few focus on the individual candidates, but rather on the party platform. This serves to heighten the influence of both the party leaders and the parties' major campaign slogans. 
CHP leader Kemal Kilicdaroglu, who took the reins of the party last year, has tried to reinvigorate and reorient the organisation from a position that Yilmaz describes as "nationalist left" to one he calls "liberal left". 
"The new agenda is good" for Turkey, says Yilmaz, "because it will compete with AKP on issues of democratisation and liberalisation." 
 Prior to CHP's new emphasis on issues like minority rights and welfare, Yilmaz says, "AKP was the only warrior in that battle. They made some reforms, but couldn't do others. But they weren't competing with anyone else." 
Under the twin slogans "CHP is for everyone" and "Turkey will breathe freely", the opposition party has tried to paint itself as a restorative populist force. 
 "We want to reach past [the party's] traditional base," CHP Regional Vice President Oguz Salici told SETimes. "We want votes from everyone, without looking at their religion or ethnicity." 
Accordingly, Salici explained, the party has waged a targeted campaign, with specific branches aimed at youth, women, workers, the elderly and the poor. In contrast to previous years, CHP has sent thousands of volunteers door to door, pushing issues in a neighbourhood-specific fashion. 
 "Our goal is 40% of the vote," notes Salici, "which is about twice what we got in 2007. We're very determined. We're sure to get over 30%." 
The Kurdish-backed Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), though unable to surpass the 10% threshold required to field candidates of its own, has nonetheless similarly influenced the climate of this year's campaigns through independent candidates affiliated with the party. It has ensured that issues like Kurdish rights and democratic reform remain on the agenda. 
The Nationalist Action Party (MHP) for its part has been rocked by a series of sex scandals during the election that saw a number of its party members resign. The conservative nationalist party's support base has been the target of the AKP, in a calculated election strategy designed to pull enough voters away from the MHP that the party fails to pass the 10% threshold; an eventuality which would result in the MHP's seats in parliament being split between the AKP and CHP. 
AKP's victory is more or less assured, though some question its ability to win enough seats to be able to enact constitutional changes singlehandedly. Such confidence is reflected in the party's campaign strategy, which revolves around the theme "Look how far we've come." 
Advertisements offering quantifiable symbols of progress have offered reason upon reason for the public to grant AKP a record third consecutive term in office. These statistics include, for instance, Turkey's GNP, which more than doubled from $320 billon in 2002 to $750 billion in 2010. 
 "AK Party is not saying anything to convince the people," Huseyin Ugur of the AKP Elections Communications Bureau told SETimes. "We're not making promises. We're simply showing people what we've done." 
Such numbers are hard to rebut, as are the very real improvements that Turkey has seen under the AKP administration. Nonetheless, CHP is predicted to do much better in this election than in the last, and enough BDP-backed independent candidates may win to form a bloc within parliament. 
Thus, though power is unlikely to change hands entirely, new voices may be heard in the national debate, something of particular importance in the face of the coming constitutional reform. 
 "Now, both Kurdish deputies and CHP deputies are going to push AKP for democratisation," Yilmaz told SETimes, "and I hope this will increase the speed and the quality of democracy in Turkey." 
