03/07/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 03/07/06
Free movement around Europe is one of the benefits that Albania's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU could eventually bring. However, say experts, the country must first successfully implement the deal and its related requirements. 
Albania has "to speed up the reforms in the employment policies, such as insurance system, the conditions and safety of work", says Arbeh Kashahu, secretary general of the ministry for integration. 
 Doing so will create the conditions for Albanians to seek jobs outside the country or pursue educational opportunities in EU member states, he adds. 
The SAA, considered a milestone on the Balkan nation's path to EU membership, was signed last month in Luxembourg. It outlines a set of political and economic criteria that authorities in Tirana are expected to meet. 
The deal clears the way for greater trade liberalisation and a more competitive market that will both challenge Albanian businesses and bring new opportunities. Officials say the potential for economic growth is substantial. 
"Being a small country, with a small market, the capacity of Albania to enter the European markets will increase after the SAA signing. The EU is the most important trade partner of Albania, with 74 per cent of total imports and 85 per cent of total exports. The relations also include a deficit of up to 820m euros in 2004," Kashahu said. 
 Ledi Bianku, professor of international rights at the University of Tirana and an expert on integration issues, agrees that signing the SAA will benefit Albania, as the country has now obtained privileged status. But several tasks must now be completed, Bianku says. 
 "Albania has to focus on the freedom of the media, on speeding up the process of return and compensation for properties, enforcement of public administration, respect for human rights and minorities, and election reform for the local elections. A task for Albania also remains the fight against corruption, organised crime and respect for independent institutions," he says. 
 According to Bianku, a misunderstanding exists among many Albanians concerning the hoped-for liberalisation of the visa regime and free movement of people. The immediate priority is to implement the trade provisions, he says. 
"Albania has to be ready to start profiting from the movement of goods. After the results in this context we slowly would have to move to the free movement of people," Bianku explains. "This issue is very important, and also includes the free movement of workers, meaning Albanians working in the EU countries.” 
