07/06/2013
By Cornelis van Zweeden for Southeast European Times in Dubrovnik -- 07/06/13
In the past seven years, Ivan Kusalic has knocked on the doors of 46 Croatian bureaucrats to gain permission to invest 1 billion euros in a golf course overlooking Dubrovnik, on the southern coast of Croatia. He is still waiting for the go-ahead. 
"Our project has to be approved by three layers of government," Kusalic, a business partner of Israeli investor Aeron Frankel, told SETimes. "But there are 46 sub-layers." 
Although 1 billion-euro investments are rare in Croatia, stories about bureaucracy are not. In April, seven Zagreb-based chambers of commerce urged the government to cut red tape. 
On May 9th, the government adopted a business development strategy that is expected to reduce bureaucracy in Croatia. The strategy was presented by Business and Trade Minister Gordan Maras to raise competitiveness and financial framework for economic success, and productivity of small businesses. 
"Currently we have 22.47 active enterprises per 1,000 population, and our aim is to raise that by 40 percent by 2020," Maras said. The plan also envisions increasing small- and medium-size businesses by 10 percent. 
Money is not a problem in the Dubrovnik region. Apart from the golf course, investors' hope to extend the airport, build two marinas, enlarge a third marina, renovate two hotel-complexes and construct a villa village. 
The total amount of investment in South Dalmatia would surpass 1.5 billion euros, or 20,000 euros per capita. 
Foreign chambers of commerce, representing 1,500 companies, asked the government to take five specific actions to reduce bureaucracy, among which was the reduction of parafiscal fees, charges that companies must pay to bodies other than tax authorities. 
"We thought there were 245 of them," Andrea Doko Jelusic, executive director at the American Chamber of Commerce in Croatia, told SETimes. "In fact, the government counted 570 such fees. They were surprised themselves." 
Because of the differences in measurements taken in Habsburg and Yugoslav times, data in the land register and the cadastre office often do not correspond. The state has put in place a procedure to "legalise" such property, but that process involves paying hefty fees to surveyors, courts, architects and local authorities. 
Last year, the government established an Agency for Investments and Competitiveness, which focuses on helping foreign investors. 
"The investment agency still has to knock on all the doors," Kusalic said. "But it is better if the agency does it, as it represents the government. For the bureaucrats, I'm someone from the street." 
Still, the agency does not work for all foreign investors. "A company must have at least 250 employees, an annual turnover of 50 million euros, and assets worth 43 million euros," Danijela Keler Stambuk, senior advisor at the agency, told SETimes. 
International organisations cautiously welcomed the agency. 
"It's clear that the government needs to do more to improve the business climate," Axel Reiserer, spokesperson of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, told SETimes. 
A paper written by a team of experts at the IMF in November 2012 highlighted the scope of the challenge. 
In terms of GDP-growth in the past decade, Croatia has underperformed all countries in the Balkans, except Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. One reason was weak FDI. 
Before the start of the global economic crisis in 2009, Croatia had enough FDI, the report stated, but the wrong kind. Most investments were in the non-tradable sector, such as tourism, where productivity gains are limited. 
Since the onset of the crisis even investments in that sector collapsed. Last year, FDI was only 0.5 billion euros, barely 10 percent of the 2008 figure. 
Is there too much bureaucracy in Croatia’s business sector? Let us know what you think in the comment section below. 
