27/04/2011
(Blic, Zaman, Balkans.com - 27/04/11; Beta, B92, Tanjug, Radio Srbija, Hurriyet, World Bulletin, AKI - 26/04/11) 
Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Serbia and Turkey agreed during a trilateral summit on Tuesday (April 26th) to assist each other's efforts towards joining the EU, but in a way that does not impinge on each other's internal affairs. 
"We have to act together in the fight against prejudice that originated from our difficult history, because if we leave room for prejudice, we will come to face numerous problems in the future," said Serbian President Boris Tadic, who hosted the meeting with his Turkish counterpart, Abdullah Gul, and the members of BiH's rotating tripartite presidency, Nebojsa Radmanovic, Bakir Izetbegovic and Zeljko Komsic. 
"We wish to see the entire region integrated in the EU as soon as possible, and this is the most important political goal which should eventually bring good to our citizens," Tadic added. 
Gul and Radmanovic, the Serb representative in the BiH presidency and its current chair, echoed Tadic's words in their remarks. 
"Our goal is to transform this area, once the scene of conflicts, into a region of togetherness which should lead us in the future," said the Turkish president, who hosted the first trilateral meeting with the Serbian and BiH leaders in Istanbul on April 24th 2010. 
Turkey, the only official EU candidate among the three, began its entry negotiations in October 2005. Although it is not a member of the Union yet, "Turkey can share its experience to help Serbia and BiH in preparations for the candidacy," Gul noted. 
Serbia hopes to gain formal recognition as an EU candidate later this year. BiH, however, has failed to make any substantial progress on its integration path since the signing of its interim trade accord and Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the Union in the summer of 2008 due to the political tensions in the country and sluggish reforms. 
All three nations are aspiring for membership in the 27-nation bloc and are "determined to help each other on that road," Radmanovic said. 
Turkey, which initiated the trilateral meetings with Serbia and BiH, says that aside from reconciliation, the mechanism also focuses on the three countries' co-operation in a number of other areas, including economy, energy, culture and environmental protection. 
It was agreed Tuesday that the third trilateral summit should be held in Sarajevo next year. 
