16/06/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 06/16/05
The Council of Europe's (CoE) European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) has released a new report that urges authorities in Zagreb to make further efforts in securing the return of refugees and displaced persons. Although a commission of experts has prepared a national anti-discrimination strategy, "the problems surrounding the acquisition of nationality encountered by persons of non-Croatian origin who have lived in the country for a long time have not yet been fully resolved," the ECRI said in a press release. "Substantial progress remains to be made concerning the return of refugees and displaced persons, especially in the matter of housing." 
In particular, the report cites continued interethnic violence and racist attacks, insufficient civil and administrative legal provisions prohibiting discrimination, the lack of a national panel tasked with combating racism, and a still unsatisfactory level of intolerance in the media. Among other measures, the ECRI urges authorities to strengthen the relevant criminal laws, boost enforcement of the existing laws, take steps towards adopting an immigration policy and do a more effective job of protecting the rights of asylum seekers and refugees. 
Earlier this month, the UN Secretary General's Representative on the Human Rights of Internally Displaced Persons also urged Zagreb to address the problems facing displaced persons. While praising Croatia for its progress in ensuring the return of Serb refugees to their pre-war homes, Walter Kalin cited a "comparatively small group of cases still remaining after the substantial investment already made by the government". 
The 1991-1995 conflict in Croatia forced more than 500,000 people to flee their homes, according to an AP report. While the majority of the Croat refugees have since returned, there are still tens of thousands of Serbs living as internally displaced or in exile in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) or in Serbia, awaiting a permanent solution. 
During his three-day official visit to Croatia, Kalin met with President Stipe Mesic, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, the Ombudsman and officials from the Council for National Minorities, international agencies and NGOs. He also travelled to Croatia's Eastern Slavonian region to meet with internally displaced persons. 
"Both the president and the prime minister made very clear to me their desire finally to resolve the difficult issues caused by the massive displacements of persons in the conflicts of the 1990s," Kalin said, praising the authorities for their political will to deal with the problem. 
The key finding of his trip, however, was that the government must make a final concerted push to address remaining issues. 
According to Kalin, Zagreb should take the necessary practical steps so" the international community can remove the Republic of Croatia from the list of countries around the world where the plight of internally displaced persons is cause for such concern". 
