01/02/2005
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 01/02/05
Several days of heavy snow and rain in Albania have caused chaos on the country's roads, especially in the northern areas, where some villages are completely isolated. Food supplies are in high demand, especially among travellers who have been stranded for several days. The snowfall -- over two meters deep in some places -- has caused 13 deaths, damaged houses and made several large roads impassable, according to local media reports. 
Food and aid distribution via military helicopters started over the weekend. Supplies are being sent from Durres and Kavaja to Kukes, Peshkopi and Mirdita. The defence ministry and the military are working together with the Civil Defence Base, the Rapid Reaction Brigade, the Engineering Brigade and the Transport Brigade, as well as with the country's military hospital, the public order and local government ministries, and municipal authorities. 
Army personnel are assisting the Civil Emergency Assistance Force in clearing roads. The forces are working in Fushe Arrez-Kukes, Qafe Buall-Peshkopi, Shkodra and Mirdita. 
During an emergency government session, Deputy Prime Minister Namik Dokle called for urgent measures to help those affected by the storms and to restore power in areas where it has been lost. 
"The government has approved emergency funds to cope with the situation -- the first priority is that food and other supplies reach the population in need as soon as possible. We are following the situation closely and will do our utmost to overcome it," Dokle said. Authorities have so far approved 332,000 euros to buy food and other supplies. An identical amount has been granted to local authorities coping with the situation. 
Meanwhile, many are urging Albanian construction companies and other businesses to offer technical and financial support. The NGO MJAFT (Enough!) is working closely with the business community and local authorities to facilitate such assistance. 
