29/04/2010
(AFP, AP, Reuters, Bloomberg, BBC, Euobserver, New York Times - 29/04/10; Reuters, AP, Bloomberg, CBSNEWS, BBC, RFE/RL, EurActiv - 28/04/10)
While European and IMF experts scramble to forge a deal with Athens -- and top EU officials continue to voice their commitment to helping Greece avoid default -- fear is spreading that the debt crisis will spread as well. 
The Standard & Poor' (S&P) credit rating agency cut Spain's long-term sovereign status from "AA+" to "AA" on Wednesday (April 28th) while suggesting that a further downgrade of Europe's fourth largest economy is possible. The announcement came a day after the agency downgraded Portugal and reduced Greece's long and short-term debt to junk status. 
"Contagion has already happened," Bloomberg news agency quoted OECD head Angel Gurria as saying Wednesday. "This is like Ebola [virus]. When you realise you have it, you have to cut your leg off in order to survive." 
European Council President Herman Van Rompuy has called an emergency summit of eurozone leaders -- slated to be held around May 10th -- to discuss the debt crisis. 
The downgrading of three members of the 16-nation eurozone in less than two days exacerbated investors' concerns about the European debt crisis as EU policy makers faced mounting pressure to approve a huge bailout package for Greece. 
Under a deal reached in Brussels last month, Greece would be able to get bilateral loans from other eurozone states and financial assistance from the IMF as a last resort, in the event it is unable to get loans in the financial markets. 
Greece needs to raise 8 billion euros to repay bonds maturing on May 19th. But Prime Minister George Papandreou complained on Wednesday that the interest rates his country is being asked to pay "are beyond any logic". He urged the EU to "prevent a fire" from engulfing the European and world economy. 
With eurozone financial institutions -- particularly those in Germany and France -- said to be holding up to 70% of Greek debt, European officials are keen to avert a Greek default. Such fears and shaken confidence in the eurozone have battered the euro, which fell to a year low Wednesday of $1.3131. 
"There is no doubt over the determination of the eurozone, of the European Central Bank (ECB), the IMF and the European Union to ensure the stability of Greece and therefore the stability of our currency," French Budget Minister Francois Baroin said on Thursday. 
After talks with IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn and ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet in Berlin, German Chancellor Angela Merkel called for speeding up the ongoing rescue effort for Athens. 
"Negotiations [in Athens] with the Greek government, the European Commission and the IMF need to be accelerated," she said. "We hope they can be wrapped up in the coming days and on the basis of this, Germany will make its decisions" about the scope of its contribution to the aid package. 
The German public is staunchly opposed to any bailout for Greece. Ahead of crucial May 9th regional elections in the North Rhine-Westphalia state, Merkel stressed that Greece will have to present a detailed budget savings plan for 2011 and 2012 to qualify for bilateral loans. 
According to reports Wednesday, under the deal that is currently being discussed, Greece would get as much as 120 billion euros in aid from the eurozone and the IMF over three years. Of that, up to 45 billion euros would be provided to Athens this year. 
Germany, Europe's largest economy, would contribute about a fifth of the assistance, according to the AP. 
EU Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn voiced confidence Thursday that the talks will be wrapped up "in the next days," and promised that the details of the rescue package would be made available soon. 
The aid package under discussion "will give Greece sufficient breathing space from pressures of financial markets", Rehn told reporters in Brussels. "I want to underline that this is done not only because of Greece, but for every euro member state and its citizens to safeguard financial stability in Europe and globally." 
