21/03/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 21/03/06
Delegations from Pristina and Belgrade held a second round of direct negotiations on decentralisation Friday (17 March). The talks, held under the auspices of UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari and chaired by his deputy, Albert Rohan, focused on local finance, intermunicipal co-operation and cross-boundary co-operation. 
The meeting was serious, constructive and productive, according to members of both delegations. However, the two sides have opposing ideas about the type of decentralisation that should be implemented and even about the goals of the latest talks. 
According to Slobodan Samardzic, a Belgrade team member quoted by Radio B92, the main item on the agenda was "the financing of the Serbian municipalities in Kosovo, horizontal connections between the Serbian municipalities in the region, and creating an intermunicipal association that will connect them to Belgrade." 
However, Pristina opposes establishing horizontal connections among Serb municipalities as well as a vertical connection between the municipalities and Belgrade, on the grounds that these would lead to mono-ethnic enclaves, said negotiating team head Hashim Thaci. "The Kosovo delegation recognises Belgrade's interest in Kosovo's Serbs, but this interest bilaterally should accord with the law," he said. 
"We are working with the highest international standards, for integration of all. We will not separate the citizens by majority or minority, but [we will recognise them as] Kosovo people," Thaci added. 
Despite the lack of agreement, Rohan said the discussion was "extremely constructive." 
"It was issue-oriented, there were no polemics and this is the way we should proceed because then we can really try to discuss the various problems, the difficulties, the controversies and try to find common ground," Rohan said. 
He said all parties agreed that financial subsidies from Belgrade for municipalities in Kosovo are acceptable on condition they are provided in a transparent manner and limited to areas within the competencies of the municipalities. 
"There are two different things. One is the co-operation of municipalities between them. This is perfectly in agreement with the Charter of the municipalities, which provides for such co-operation on specific issues," said Rohan. "For instance, if not every municipality wants to run a hospital, they can incorporate to have one for more than one municipality. These are practical issues and for this purpose, partnerships can be formed among the municipalities." 
The delegations also agreed that Kosovo municipalities have a right to form intermunicipal arrangements of functional co-operation within their areas of competency, as long as it would not result in an additional layer of government between the municipalities and the central authorities, Rohan said. 
The third round of talks will take place again in Vienna on 3 April. 
