18/10/2004
(Cyprus Media Net, Xinhua - 18/10/04; Cyprus News Agency - 17/10/04; UNFICYP, AFP, Anadolu Agency, Cyprus Mail - 16/10/04)
Responding to accusations by Greek Cypriot President Tassos Papadopoulos, the UN Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) stressed Saturday (16 October) its long-standing allegiance to efforts to reconcile the divided island of Cyprus. 
Returning from a visit to Estonia on Thursday, Papadopoulos claimed that the UN had allocated funds to support a "yes" vote in the 24 April referendum on the reunification plan for the island, sponsored by Secretary General Kofi Annan. He also referred to a letter he had received from UN Special Envoy for Cyprus Alvaro de Soto, allegedly confirming the provision of funding ahead of the vote. 
"In a letter to me, de Soto refers to the allocation of funds for Cyprus prior to the referendum because the UN and others consider it to be a bi-communal effort which should be reinforced financially," the AFP quoted the Greek Cypriot leader as saying Thursday. 
Opposing Annan's plan to end Cyprus' 30-year division, Papadopoulos led a campaign for a "no" vote in the referendum. 
Eventually, 76 per cent of the Greek Cypriots rejected Annan's blueprint, while 65 per cent of the Turkish Cypriots approved it. As a result, only the internationally recognised Greek Cypriot part of the island joined the EU on 1 May. 
Referring to de Soto's letter, UNFICYP said Saturday that publicising correspondence exchanged in the framework of Annan's good offices would counter UN practice. Stressing that the UN has "nothing to hide", UNFICYP spokesman Brian Kelly listed three points de Soto's letter made. 
"UN agencies have been involved for decades in efforts to promote bi-communal reconciliation and to help prepare the environment for a normalisation of the situation in Cyprus," the UNFICYP said, stressing that all efforts to further those goals would receive continued support. 
UNFICYP and other UN agencies always have facilitated bi-communal contacts and meetings on request, regardless of whether those requests came from organisations or people supporting or opposing the peace plan, the statement added. 
"The good offices mission made available information to civil society organisations regarding the Secretary-General's plan. It was glad to do so with any persons or organisations, regardless of where they stood on the issues," UNFICYP said. "It would have been derelict in its duty had it failed to do so." 
Meanwhile, the issue reportedly has sparked a row in Cyprus between supporters and opponents of the UN plan. 
Democratic Rally leader Nicos Anastassiades said Papadopoulos' accusations demeaned the political debate and urged the Greek Cypriot president to stop "provoking phenomena of division". 
"We must leave the 'yes' and 'no' behind us so that we can move forward," said Anastassiades. 
Others called for an investigation into the funding spent by both the "yes" and "no" camps in their campaigns ahead of the referendum, as well as into the sources and beneficiaries of the funding. 
