21/03/2012
By Alina Radu for Southeast European Times in Chisinau -- 21/03/12
Moldova's new president, 64-year-old former judge Nicolae Timofti, has promised to lead the country on the European accession path. But he must overcome several challenges in order to do so. 
Timofti assumes the post after a narrow vote last week. The country has been without a leader for almost three years. 
"One of the most important state institutions is paralised. The vital process of country development have been affected by the instablity and uncertainty," Timofti told parliament on Monday (March 19th) as the lawmakers validated the March 16th election. 
Topping his agenda will be to solve the political deadlock. Many debates have concluded that the constitution has to be changed, allowing the next president to be elected by the citizens, not the politically divided parliament. 
"We have to recognize that the constitutional reform that started in 2000 is not finished. Today we confront more severe problems that affect not only state institutions, but also fundamental human rights," Timofti told lawmakers. 
Constitutional expert and MP Victor Popa said that one of Timofti’s first goals should be constitutional reform and improvement. 
"I think it is his obligation to co-operate with the parliament on constitutional reform. Of course it is a long and a complicated procedure, but the new president should ensure that the constitution works for all citizens," Popa told SETimes. 
The parliament has tried seven times to elect a leader, but failed each time to present a candidate to garner the majority of votes. 
The deadlock stems from the fact that the Aliance for European Integration -- which has the majority of the votes in the parliament -- is short by two votes, while representatives of the Communist Party refused to vote for an alliance candidate. 
In November 2011, several members of the Communists left the party to create a Socialist faction in the parliament. In the March 16th election, they joined the pro-European majority. 
The new president has said EU accession will be a priority. 
"We need an idea to reunite society, to make it move forward as a whole. And I believe that this is the idea of the European integration. People should understand that the EU is a space of values and welfare and they deserve to be a part of it -- but we have to make certain efforts as well," Timofti said during the elections. 
One of those efforts, Justice Minister Oleg Efrim said, is judicial reform. 
"We are at the begining of justice reform in Moldova, and the contribution of the new president is just a must. He is doomed to offer us all his knowledge and expertise for justice for human rights," Efrim told SETimes. 
Timofti agreed. "An independent judicial system is the key in the country's development. From this grows investments, places to work, entrepreneurship development, combating the poverty efforts and the trust of Moldovan citizens in the state and the future," he said. 
Although citizens differ in their opinions on whether the new leader will solve the country's problems, many agree that things are worse without a president. 
"Moldova has not had a president for so long. It is like a house without a manager. The country cannot develop without a president; nobody believes in the future," Veronica Popescu, a teacher from Calarasi, told SETimes. 
"We don't have places to work, we have to leave [the country] every year [to find work] because here we don't have a job market. Will the president solve this problem? I don't think so, but a president means more political stability in the country," 52-year-old citizen Gheorge Tataru told SETimes. 
"I was in the school on the day of elections -- we have a big TV screen in the hall. All the teachers and pupils were watching and listening [to the vote]. For me, it seems to be important. Since I was born, I had only one communist president -- this is first pro-European president in my life," 11-year-old student Inga Taranu told SETimes. 
