29/12/2011
By Bedrana Kaletović for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 29/12/11
When Santa Claus brings gifts, the gratification is clear on children's faces. The most famous Santa Claus in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Dragan Divjak, or Seko as he is commonly known, has been bringing smiles to children's faces for more than 30 years. 
"I used to go through cities on a sleigh, dressed in my red suit, and gave out gift packages to children. There is no more sleigh today, that kind of tradition is lost, but giving to the kids is still a custom," Divjak told SETimes. 
Even today, as the world-wide economic crisis has brought poverty to the doors of numerous families in BiH, several NGOs strive to bring a smile to every child's face. 
Tuzla-based Children of the Earth, along with several similar NGOs in BiH, has run the ''One sweet, One child'' programme for the past six years now. 
"The goal is to ensure a New Year's package for children of low social standing so that they too can experience a holiday season full of blessings," volunteer Irma Bastic told SETimes. 
Bastic and her colleagues collect sweets in shopping centres where citizens donate them for this purpose. 
"The tradition that Santa Claus should give gifts to children has acquired a new meaning during the crisis. Santa Claus [is working] under recession conditions," volunteer Ivica Gojcin told SETimes. 
But for some, gifts are not all that is wanted. 
For Children's Village of Peace in Turija, New Year's celebrations are always a bit different. The NGO takes care of around 150 little ones left without family and guardian care, providing love and security in a family surrounding. 
"I wish that my two sisters and I remain together, that they don't take us apart and that we always get along nicely,'' said 12-year-old Djula who came to the village three months ago after her parents passed away. 
The village was built by the German Rudolf Walther Foundation, together with the local community. For the holidays, presents are made by children in Germany and sent to the village. 
"The most important thing is to have someone thinking of you, someone who appreciates your work and wants to help you in your efforts to make the life of these children better," said Amra Ramadanovic, a psychologist at the village. 
