25/07/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 25/07/05
Southeast Europe's biggest music festival, held from 7 July to 10 July in Novi Sad's Austro-Hungarian Petrovaradin fortress, was attended by more than 150,000 visitors, several hundred performers and more than 1,500 accredited journalists from around the world, including major media outlets such as MTV and BBC. Rainy weather did not deter fans, tens of thousands of whom stood in the mud singing "I'm Only Happy When it Rains" together with Garbage's Shirley Manson. 
 The performers at this year's festival included White Stripes, Underworld, Fatboy Slim, Ian Brown, Garbage, Slayer, Apocalyptica, and DJs such as Carl Cox, Felix da Housecat and former Underworld member Darren Emerson. Visitors from all over the region, as well as from Great Britain, Hungary, Ireland and other EU countries, journeyed to Novi Sad to hear a broad range of music, including speed metal, rock’n’roll, jazz, blues, world music, techno, country and classical. 
 Officially, this was the fifth EXIT festival. However, as festival General Manager Bojan Boskovic explained, the idea goes back to the first postwar demonstrations in Serbia against Slobodan Milosevic in 1999, when tens of thousands of students protested for more than 100 days against the regime. The first "unofficial" EXIT festival was held in the summer of 2000. It lasted 100 days and marked the dawn of Milosevic's defeat. 
The first organised EXIT festival was held in 2001 at Petrovaradin, gathering more than 200,000 fans. Since then, world-renowned stars such as Massive Attack, Tricky and Iggy Pop have been welcomed to Petrovaradin, as well as the world's most famous DJs. 
Knowing its origins, it's not hard to understand the meaning of one of this year's UK visitor's description of EXIT festival as "smaller than Glastonbury, but with a lot more energy". Much of that energy comes from the themes EXIT has always emphasised. Whether it's an anti-drug or anti-trafficking campaign, or a bid to annul the visa regime for Serbian citizens, the festival has traditionally delivered a strong message about urgent issues. 
This year, however, the message was stifled by a bomb threat and political pressure from local authorities. Organisers had planned a silent commemoration of the victims of the Srebrenica massacre, followed by a broadcast of Annie Lennox's song "I Saved the World Today" and a declaration. "Ten years after, let us promise our children and their children, that Srebrenica, Bratunac, Vukovar, Oluja, Ahmici, Djakovica and Staro Gacko won’t be repeated. Ever again," the text of the statement read. But the plans had to be scrapped after local police warned of a possible attack in the event that anti-war messages were highlighted at the festival. 
If that wasn't enough, the Serbian Radical Party -- which controls the municipality of Novi Sad -- weighed in on the issue, with party chief Tomislav Nikolic warning that "there won’t be an EXIT next year, if they choose to make a provocation by mentioning Srebrenica." 
A number of incidents early on in the festival raised the level of tension. On the first night, people threw bottles at the Bosnian band Dubioza kolektiv after they played "Cannot Forgive", a song about the Srebrenica massacre. "
This isn't just about commemorating Srebrenica only, but about remembering Srebrenica among a heap of war crimes which were committed against Serbs and Croatians and Bosnians and Albanians and everyone else. It's about this being one minute for peace and I don't want what we are doing to be now politicised," Boskovic said. The organisers finally decided that they had to ensure the safety of the concerts and prevent the risk of a serious incident. 
Despite the war of words over the planned commemoration, Novi Sad mayor Maja Gojkovic -- a Radical Party member -- turned up at Petrovaradin on the first day of the festival, smiled and was photographed with fans. The Novi Sad local government supported the festival financially, as did the federal government. The hope remains that future festivals will provide, in addition to great music, a forum to consider issues of major concern. 
