30/07/2007
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 30/07/07
Drought, fire, electricity outages and water shortages are among the effects of a heat wave that has afflicted Southeast Europe during the past weeks. Rivers are drying up, and crops are being destroyed at an unprecedented level. Even when the searing temperatures have abated, the impact – in terms of the economy – could be felt for a long time to come. 
Romania has already lost almost 1.7 million hectares of its grain crop, out of a total 2.8 million. Experts from the National Meteorology Agency project that up to 90% of the crop will eventually be destroyed. 
For the first time in years, the agricultural sector's contribution to GDP is being surpassed by construction. Meanwhile, specialists with the Romanian Waters Administration warn that rivers will dry up in the coming weeks. "If it is necessary, we'll go as far as to rationalise water use," Interior Minister Cristian David said. 
 Hydropower production is down. The largest plant in Romania, Portile de Fier, saw a drop in power production of 40%. Authorities warn that the heat wave could lead to the closure of the Cernavoda nuclear power plant and the suspension of bilateral energy export contracts. 
At least 33 heat-related deaths have been recorded. The National Meteorology Administration issued a red code warning for the counties in the south of the country, including Bucharest. Blackouts left much of the capital without power last week, as power consumption nearly doubled because of the excessive use of air conditioning. More than 1,000 temporary first-aid centres have been set up, as well as thousands of water distribution points. 
Serbia has also been sweltering, with temperatures soaring as high as 42 degrees Celsius in some areas. In Belgrade, temperatures have mostly hovered around the 40-degree mark -- a huge difference from the seasonal average of 28 degrees. 
Serbia does not have laws that would allow the authorities to introduce a state of emergency in extreme weather conditions. However, on July 19th, the cabinet accepted the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy's recommendations, and decreed a mandatory 11am to 4pm break for people working outdoors. 
The heat has also resulted in several fires, the biggest of which broke out in the Stara Planina mountains, about 300km southwest of Belgrade. An estimated 300 hectares of grassland and shrubbery have burned, and firefighters were unable to control the blaze for three days. 
In Kosovo, the authorities decided July 24th to declare a state of emergency. Fires have broken out in the municipalities of Gjilan, Kamenica, Ferizaj, Peja, Prizren and Suhareka Hani i Elezit. 
The Kosovo government has earmarked 700,000 euros for emergency management. The Kosovo Assembly has appealed to Austria, Germany, France and Slovenia for assistance. Government spokeswoman Ulpiana Lama said they received a response from Slovenia, which has authorised its KFOR troops to help the local authorities fight the fires. 
Heat has caused a number of fires across Montenegro. Despite scorching temperatures of 42 degrees Celsius in Podgorica, however, the Montenegrin government decided not to introduce a state of emergency at its July 19th session. The authorities are focusing their efforts on providing services for citizens and protecting the republic's vital tourist industry. 
"Police, hospitals, cafes, shops ... they must work," says Interior Minister Jusuf Kalamperovic. 
The heat and drought have further exacerbated Albania's perennial summer energy shortages. The country depends on hydropower, which has sunk to historically low levels. KESH, the state energy corporation, has been cutting power for consumers for two to four hours a day. Officials also report fires across the country, including in Diber, Lure, Kukes, Korçe, Lezhe and Tirana. The Albanian government established a group on July 20th to take charge of the situation, and police and army personnel will be on call. 
In Macedonia, a state of emergency was already in effect, due to a previous heat wave in June. Measures include the reduction of working hours in the public administration with a recommendation to the private sector to do the same. Those working outdoors have had their working hours reduced to 7am to 11am and 6pm to 8pm. 
Temperatures that have reached 43 degrees Celsius have caused more than 200 fires in Macedonia, destroying more than 4,000 hectares of forests and pastures. 
Fires burned all over Greece last week as temperatures remained high, prompting authorities to issue fire warnings for Attica and a number of islands including Corfu, Lefkada and Zakynthos. The daily Kathimerini reports that 180 fires broke out across the country in the past few days, including a forest fire in Nafpaktos in central Greece and another one in Elikona, in Viotia. The worst damage to date has been to thousands of hectares of the Parnitha Forest -- Attica's last remaining fir tree forest. 
 Scientists warn that loss of forest acreage has an effect on Athens that is equivalent to a doubling of vehicles overnight. In other words, Athens seems to have lost an essential part of its natural cooling mechanism. The Environmental Ministry says it is working on a programme to address reforestation and reverse erosion. 
In Croatia, the number of drownings has doubled as people flock to the water in an attempt to seek relief from the heat, according to the daily Jutarni List. In Serbia, six people have died in the last two months at a popular public lake resort in Belgrade. The water-related deaths are caused by alcohol consumption and shocks to the system induced by the contact with cold water, authorities say. 
Although meteorologists are saying the temperatures are due to break, no rain is forecast for the region. 
 SE Times correspondents Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi, Gabriela Preda, Zoran Nikolovski, Nedjeljko Rudovic, Igor Jovanovic and Jonilda Koci contributed to this article. 
