10/03/2009
By Christos Ringas for the Southeast European Times in Athens -- 10/03/09
Sakis Rouvas will represent Greece at the 54th Eurovision in Moscow by performing "This Is Our Night". The 37-year-old native of Corfu is competing for the second time in the famous annual contest. In 2004 Rouvas took third place for Greece with his rendition of "Shake It". Besides singing, Rouvas occasionally acts and hosts TV programmes. In fact, he co-hosted the 2006 Eurovision, which took place in Athens, though he did not compete. 
The star has an army of dedicated fans who call themselves Rouvitses. He is best known in Greece and Cyprus but also enjoys considerable popularity in Russia, this year's host country, from widespread exposure as a contestant in the 2004 Eurovision and from his hit duet with Russia's Philip Kirkorov, "I Want You Like Crazy". That popularity could help Greece's cause in the voting. 
Rouvas, whose recording career dates back to 1991, epitomises the stars who have represented Greece in recent years. Initially, the country showed relatively little interest in Eurovision and sent promising but generally obscure artists. None of them finished better than third (Antique, "Die For You", in 2001). 
However, the contest took on added importance for Greeks in 2003: historic rival Turkey won first place, while Greece finished a comparatively embarrassing 17th. The country now sends established performers to represent it. 
Two years later, Greece won its only Eurovision championship to date, with Swedish-born Elena Paparizou's "My Number One". It was actually her second Eurovision representing Greece; in 2001, she had been a vocalist for Antique. 
Greeks celebrated their triumph in the streets of Athens, with the nation's tourism ministry naming Paparizou its official ambassador. 
The country's three entries since 2005 could not match that success; they finished ninth, seventh and third. 
Greece has high expectations for its Eurovision entry this year. The general public expects the song to finish among the top three. 
 "This Is Our Night" is the work of Dimitris Kondopoulos (melody) and the team of Craig Porteils and Cameron Giles-Webb (lyrics). 
