09/01/2008
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 09/01/08
A database containing the credit history of consumers in Albania opened on January 1st. The initiative, which aims to increase the number of loans given, lower costs and improve loan quality, was initiated at a time when credit is booming. 
"The main goal of the credit registry will be to help execute sound credit transactions by making available all necessary information that the 18 banks in the system have related to consumers' credit," Bank of Albania Governor Ardian Fullani said at a press conference announcing the initiative last year. 
The registry will be administered by the Bank of Albania. 
 Banks will upload credit information to the registry and will have access to the information when needed. Individuals can apply at the Central Bank for a "Report of Loan Consumer", which includes their full history. 
Consumers need to sign a clause of preliminary consent, which will give the bank the right to exchange data in the registry. This clause will be part of the loan application and of the signed contract from the consumer, according to the Bank of Albania Supervisory Department Deputy Director Miranda Ramaj. 
Central Bank analysts say the registry will help reduce informality in the economy and encourage an increase in loan volume -- thus influencing economic growth. "The registry helps the banks make good decisions within a short period of time, in an exact and objective way," concludes an analysis. 
Currently, the banking sector in Albania is experiencing rapid development, especially as many large European banks -- Austrian Raiffeisen Bank, the Italian San Paolo Imi and Intesa, and the French Societe Generale and Credit Agricole -- have begun to operate in the country. 
Loans have increased -- by 70% in 2005, by 55% in 2006 and the trend continued in 2007 with an increase of 50% -- boosting the loan to GDP ratio to 24%. 
But, with the increase of credit comes problems. Loans in default increased from 1% to 3% -- making the registry more necessary. 
Most of the developed economies in the world have credit bureaus and registries where detailed information regarding consumers is maintained. The first credit registries were introduced at the end of the 18th century in the United States. In Europe, the first credit registry was introduced in Germany around 1930. 
