25/03/2009
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 25/03/09
A meeting of the UN Security Council on Monday (March 23rd) served as a forum for the continuing enmity between Serbia and Kosovo. Serbian President Boris Tadic and Kosovo Foreign Minister Skender Hyseni accused each other's country of facilitating crime and turmoil. 
The council convened to hear a report from Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the situation in Kosovo, presented by UN special envoy Lamberto Zannier. Tadic and Hyseni represented their countries in the debate afterwards. 
Tadic reiterated that Belgrade would "never recognise the independence of Kosovo". He also denounced the "ethnic-Albanian mafia in Kosovo", accusing it of drug, human and weapons trafficking. "It is obvious to everybody ... Kosovo is no state," he added, calling for the implementation of the UN's six-point plan. Serbia says the plan protects the rights of ethnic Serbs living in Kosovo, while Kosovo considers it an infringement of national sovereignty. 
Speaking later, Hyseni condemned Belgrade for its behaviour in Serb-dominated northern Kosovo. Serbia is rendering "evident support" to those who make the north "a safe haven for all kinds of criminal and illegal economic activity", Hyseni said. He also accused it of "encouraging, even blackmailing, even threatening" ethnic Serbs in order to discourage them from co-operating with Pristina. 
Hyseni, though, held out the prospect of direct talks and normalised relations between Kosovo and Serbia. 
Speaking in defence of a traditional ally, Russian Ambassador to the UN Vitaly Churkin accused Pristina of blaming "Belgrade for all the problems of Kosovo". US delegate Rosemary DiCarlo, on the other hand, criticised Serbia for continuing to support "illegal parallel structures" in northern Kosovo. 
Zannier, in presenting the secretary-general's report, said Kosovo is "substantially stable" except for persistent ethnic tensions in "several traditional flashpoints, particularly in and around northern Mitrovica". He faulted both Serbia and Kosovo for "stopping short of where one needed to be in order to feel confident that Kosovo was well and truly launched onto the path of lasting peace and prosperity". 
