20/05/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 20/05/09 
Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic is on an official three-day visit to Serbia in an attempt to normalise ties between the two countries. Relations chilled in October 2008, when Montenegro recognised Kosovo, which Serbia considers its province. 
In response to that recognition of Kosovo, Serbia immediately proclaimed Montenegro's ambassador to Belgrade persona non grata. Montenegro has not had an ambassador in Serbia since. 
During his visit, Vujanovic talked with President Boris Tadic about a host of issues straining bilateral relations. 
Both agreed that while their views on Kosovo differ, they can do much to improve ties. However, Tadic made clear that the Kosovo issue remains open and Serbia "does not hide the fact" that the Montenegrin recognition of Kosovo affected it. "It happened at a delicate time, when Serbia had just opened a debate on Kosovo's … status before the International Court of Justice," said Tadic. 
Serbia and Montenegro share historical ties, said Tadic, and any strengthening of their relations contributes to the stability of the entire region. He expects Podgorica will quickly appoint a new ambassador to Serbia. 
Vujanovic has said before that Podgorica needs an envoy in Belgrade. He concurred with Tadic, saying Kosovo should not be an obstacle to relations and they should be "the two closest states in the international community". 
Montenegro had to recognise Kosovo's independence, Vujanovic told Serbian media prior to his arrival in Belgrade, because it believed that European integration -- a top priority for the Podgorica government -- would otherwise be jeopardised. 
Since 22 of the 27 EU member states had already recognised Kosovo, a failure to follow suit would seriously have hampered Montenegro's accession, he said. 
Another thorny issue concerns dual citizenship. Tadic explained "it is unacceptable for Serbia that the Serbian people in Montenegro have a status of national minority," but that "it is natural to have an autochthonous status, just like the Montenegrins in Serbia have." 
Vujanovic expressed hope that after several meetings between the relevant ministries, "the final meeting on the issue will take place soon." He added that "the conceptually different approaches will be overcome by an agreement … that would preserve the different concepts to dual citizenship in both [countries'] laws." 
Both presidents assessed economic relations as good despite their political differences, with a potential to be even better. Serbian officials have said they are keen to invest in the Montenegrin economy, especially in the energy sector and transportation infrastructure. 
During his visit, Vujanovic also talked with Serbian Prime Minister Mirko Cvetkovic, relaying his wish for Serbia to fully co-operate with The Hague tribunal because that is a main condition for furthering European integration. 
"It is … very important for the entire region that Serbia's European integration continue," Vujanovic said. 
