20/08/2007
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times in Ankara -- 20/08/07
Strengthened by its decisive victory in the July 22nd elections, the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) has decided to re-nominate Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul for the presidency. 
Parliament will hold up to four voting sessions to elect the next head of state, with the first slated for Monday (August 20th). Many analysts expect Gul to win in the third session, on August 28th. In that round, a candidate needs only a simple majority -- 276 votes -- to be elected. 
Turkey's Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) has fielded its own candidate, former Defence Minister Sabahattin Cakmakoglu, and the small leftist party DSP has nominated Tayfun Icli. Since these parties are participating, the required quorum will likely be met even if the main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) were to stage a boycott. 
The CHP successfully halted a previous attempt to elect Gul in April. His nomination sparked Turkey's most serious political crisis in a decade, with hundreds of thousands of protestors rallying in the big cities in support of secularism. The military also weighed in, warning that it would defend the secularist state at any cost. 
Last week, however, the military refrained from making any major new statements on Gul's candidacy. 
 "All has been said" on the subject, Chief of General Staff Yasar Buyukanit told journalists. "I will not speak. When I speak I am misunderstood," he also said. Some have suggested that military statements suggesting a possible coup backfired in the elections, leading to stronger support for the AKP. 
Asked whether military officials would decline to attend events at the Cankaya presidential palace because Gül's wife wears the Islamic headscarf, Buyukanit said "we do not want to argue with anyone." 
 However, he added, "we have principles to which we are attached." 
Buyukanit's carefully chosen words appear to reflect a "wait and see" approach. In 1997, the military forced out a previous, Islam-oriented government in which Gul served as state minister and spokesman. 
"It is clear that the coming days ahead will be very difficult for relations between the new president and the military," Sedat Ergin, editor-in-chief of Milliyet newspaper, told CNN Turk. According to the Turkish constitution, the president is its commander-in-chief of the army. 
Although the AKP, a successor to the now-banned Welfare Party, has roots in political Islam, its leaders say they are committed to secularism and democracy. Gul last week sought to reassure critics as he announced his second bid for the presidency, vowing that the protection of secularism is one of his guiding principles. 
