14/10/2004
(AFP, Hina, RFE/RL - 13/10/04; European Commission - 06/10/04)
Outgoing EU Enlargement Commissioner Guenter Verheugen said Wednesday (13 October) that Croatia is ready to start membership negotiations with the Union. 
Croatia became an official EU candidate in June. Brussels said then that accession talks with the country would begin in early 2005. 
"Croatia is not only sufficiently, but extraordinarily prepared for beginning ... negotiations," Verheugen said at a joint press conference with Croatian Prime Minister Ivo Sanader in Zagreb on Wednesday. 
Ahead of the December EU summit in Copenhagen, which is expected to set a starting date for Croatia's talks, the commissioner suggested that the negotiation process should begin by February or March next year. 
Verheugen was speaking during a two-day trip to Croatia -- the last country he is visiting in his current capacity. He takes up his new post as European Commission (EC) vice president and commissioner for industry on 1 November. 
After talks with Sanader, Verheugen said the EU would not set any new conditions for Croatia to meet. The country will be judged according to its merits, the Croatian news agency Hina quoted him as adding. 
One of the key conditions the country has been asked to fulfil before joining the Union is full co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal. Others include minority rights, refugee returns, judiciary reform, anti-corruption efforts and regional co-operation. 
Sanader said Zagreb's goal is to meet all criteria for EU membership by the end of 2007 and it "will insist on that". 
"It is the ambition of this government to conclude talks with the European Commission in 2007, and then it will be up to the EU to decide on the date of accession," he added. 
Co-operation with the UN tribunal in The Hague remains a major hurdle, however. Croatia has been frequently criticised by tribunal officials for its failure to arrest and hand over fugitive General Ante Gotovina, who along with Bosnian Serb wartime leaders Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, tops the list of most-wanted indictees. 
During a meeting of EU foreign ministers on Monday, UN chief war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte again urged Zagreb to detain Gotovina. Speaking to reporters in Luxembourg, del Ponte voiced hope that he would be arrested before 23 November, when she is due to submit a report to the UN Security Council. 
Croatian authorities maintain that Gotovina has fled the country. 
"Our police and intelligence services have taken all measures to locate him, but all tips and leads so far have proved wrong," President Stipe Mesic was quoted as saying this week. 
Authorities reportedly assured Verheugen on Wednesday that they would make every effort to bring the fugitive to justice. 
