05/01/2005
(Athens News Agency, Kathimerini - 04/01/05; Dnevnik.bg - 27/12/04; International Herald Tribune - 23/12/04; AP, AFP - 22/12/04)
Greek Prime Minister Costas Karamanlis has said that 2005 will be a year of major changes and reforms in the economy, the administration, the education and health sectors. Their purpose would be to create the necessary conditions for dynamic and stable economic development, the Athens News Agency reported Tuesday (4 January). 
"The basic aim is a competitive economy, which produces more and creates new jobs," the agency quoted Karamanlis as saying at a reception Monday, hosted by the Athens Commerce and Industry Chamber. "We are working so that day by day the citizens ascertain tangible results in the improvement of their daily life," he added. 
Karamanlis is meeting with members of his cabinet this week to determine the priorities in each sector and to identify problems requiring immediate attention. According to press reports, the government plans a number of steps, including tax and price hikes, cuts in state spending, and passage of a new law on development. 
Economy and Finance Minister George Alogoskoufis, who also attended the reception, told reporters that the next 12 months would be "crucial" for the country. 
Greece came under strong criticism from EU financial officials recently for its failure to curb public spending, which has pushed its deficit well above the 3 per cent of GDP ceiling set for Euro zone countries. The record cost of the 2004 Athens Olympics was not the only cause of the huge budget gap, both Greek and EU officials have said. 
 Citing new data and market evidence, the Greek daily Kathimerini reported Tuesday that the budget deficit for 2004 might have reached or even exceeded 6 per cent. About two weeks ago, EU Finance Commissioner Joaquin Almunia said the Greek budget gap was expected to stand at 5.3 per cent of GDP. He also voiced scepticism that Greece would be able to meet its 2005 budget deficit target of 2.8 per cent of GDP, which depends on economic growth of 3.9 per cent. Describing both figures as overly optimistic, EU officials say a deficit of 3.6 per cent and GDP growth of 3.5 per cent are more likely. 
Greece's debt-to-GDP ratio also exceeds the 60 per cent limit, standing at an estimated 112.1 per cent in 2004, up from 109.9 per cent in 2003. According to government projections, it will remain above 100 per cent over the next three years. In 2005, it will stand at 111.9 per cent, according to EU officials. 
Alogoskoufis said Monday the objective this year is to achieve economic growth and greater competitiveness so the country can "tackle the problems of unemployment and public finances". He expressed confidence that the government's economic policy and the thrust of the economy would help authorities meet their goal. 
