02/05/2005
(Haaretz, FT, The Scotsman, Xinhua - 02/05/05; AP, Reuters, VOA, The New York Times, BBC, Turkish Press - 01/05/05)
Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Israeli counterpart Ariel Sharon have agreed to establish a telephone hotline between their offices so that they may share intelligence and other information instantly. The Turkish leader arrived in Jerusalem on Sunday (1 May) in a bid to further develop bilateral relations and to promote his country as a possible mediator in efforts to restore peace in the Middle East. 
"In our meetings with the sides, we will remind [them of] our readiness for a possible go-between role or to host conferences in our country," Erdogan said before the start of the visit, his first to Israel since assuming his post in 2003. 
Accompanied by a delegation of four ministers and 100 business executives, the Turkish leader met with Sharon, President Moshe Katsav, Deputy Prime Minister Shimon Peres and other officials. On Monday, he travels to the West Bank city of Ramallah to meet with Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas and Prime Minister Ahmed Qureia. 
According to the Israeli independent daily Haaretz, Erdogan proposed setting up a Turkish-Israeli-Palestinian task force to examine "how to combat terrorism, preserve the calm and make peace". 
"We were very impressed by his offers and suggestions ... I intend to take full advantage of this attempt to advance diplomatic efforts in the Middle East," Sharon said at a joint press conference with Erdogan. In the event an international forum is organised in the future, he would be glad to see it held in Turkey, the Israeli leader said. He added that Turkey could play a role in the development of the coastal Gaza Strip after Israel pulls out of it in August, helping with the construction of a power station and high-rise housing for Palestinians in the area. 
"We are ready and prepared to contribute whatever is asked of us," said Erdogan, whose country has traditionally maintained good relations both with Israel and the Palestinian Authority, though ties with Israel cooled last year as a result of criticism by Erdogan. 
Turkey is Israel's most important regional partner, with bilateral trade reaching $2 billion last year, and is also a preferred tourist destination for many Israelis. On Sunday, the two countries signed a research and development agreement. A $400m deal on the upgrading of Turkish F-4 Phantom jets is also on the table. A project for the construction of an underwater electric line from Turkey to Gaza was among the topics Erdogan discussed with Peres. 
Meeting with Katsav, Erdogan said that, like Israel, Turkey is concerned about Iran's nuclear programme. "That concern is shared by us all. It threatens not only you but also us and all of humanity," he said. 
