26/05/2011
By Igor Jovanovic and Biljana Pekusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 26/05/11
After more than a decade on the run, top war crimes fugitive Ratko Mladic is set to face justice at the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. At a press conference in Belgrade on Thursday (May 26th), Serbian President Boris Tadic said that police have arrested the former Bosnian Serb general and that extradition proceedings are under way. 
The move clears one of the last remaining hurdles to Serbia's EU accession, long hampered by the issue of war crimes fugitives. 
"Mladic's arrest has closed a difficult period of history," Tadic said. "We have removed the tarnish from Serbia, all of its citizens and the Serb people wherever they may live." 
The former Bosnian Serb general was apprehended in a co-ordinated operation conducted by Serbia's Security and Information Agency (BIA) and a police action team, Tadic said. He confirmed that the arrest took place on Serbian territory but declined to give details. 
Regional media reports said police located the fugitive in the village of Lazarevo near Zrenjanin, 75km from Belgrade. He is said to have been living in the house of an impoverished cousin, Branislav Mladic, and going by the name Milorad Komadic. These reports have not been officially confirmed. 
With Mladic bound for The Hague, one indictee -- Goran Hadzic -- remains at large. Serbian authorities will do their best to arrest him, Tadic pledged, adding that his country has demonstrated its readiness to co-operate fully with the tribunal. 
 World, region respond to news of arrest  
Reaction from NATO, EU and the European Parliament (EP) came quick on the heels of Tadic's press conference. NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said that Mladic played a key role in some of the darkest episodes of Balkan history, and that his arrest finally offers "a chance for justice to be done". 
The European Commission welcomed the news as an historic step in the right direction. According to spokesperson Natasha Butler, the move shows Serbia is committed to reconciliation in the region. Meanwhile, EP President Jerzy Buzek said the arrest would provide new impetus to the integration process. 
Leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) two entities also responded positively. In Republika Srpska, President Milorad Dodik said Belgrade has lived up to its commitments. 
"By arresting Mladic, Serbia fulfilled an international obligation that all countries in the region took on under the Dayton Peace Agreement," Dodik said. 
Zeljko Komsic, a member of the BiH presidency, said he was "very pleased". 
Mladic will "finally answer for all the crimes he committed, especially for genocide in Srebrenica," he said in comments quoted by the local news agency FENA. 
 Serbian analysts question timing  
Within Serbia, political commentators expressed relief that the Mladic chapter has been closed. But some wondered why it has taken so long. 
"The arrest of Ratko Mladic is good news for Serbia, but now we get the impression that the government knew all along where he was," military analyst Zoran Dragisic told SETimes. He added that the authorities apparently waited for a moment which would be politically advantageous for Serbia. 
Dusan Janic, of the Institute of Social Sciences in Belgrade, agreed. 
"The bad news is that he was in Serbia," Janjic said. "He was arrested by those who knew his whereabouts since 2000-2004. Serbian President Boris Tadic should not only celebrate, but should explain why are citizens of Serbia harassed ten years, why they spent the budget funds, and only now he was arrested, and was there all the time." 
Still, Janic added, the arrest remains a positive development, particularly considering the insistence from some EU nations -- particularly the Netherlands -- that Serbian integration cannot proceed without Mladic at The Hague. 
"Now there won't be brakes on Serbia's EU integration, and the position of the Netherlands will be eased," Jancic said. "It closes a dark side of Serbian history and opens the possibility for better relations with neighbours." 
Likewise, analyst Dejan Vuk Stankovic stressed the significance for Serbia's EU path. 
"Mladic's arrest is the fulfillment of an obligation to The Hague [tribunal], as well as of the moral and historical obligation Serbia has to the victims of the war in Bosnia-Herzegovina, he told SETimes. "That is the road to meeting the conditions of the European integration process." 
Ordinary citizens in Serbia, a politically polarized country where Mladic still enjoys considerable support among nationalists, had mixed responses to the news. 
"I am disappointed that they managed to catch him alive," said Belgrade resident Milena Ostojic. 
But a fellow resident, Stevan Maksimovic, expressed relief. "Finally! That criminal for ten years, guiding our lives! I wish him a long stay in The Hague." 
