10/08/2006
(Euronews -- 09/08/06; BBC, Reuters, VOA -- 08/08/06; UPI -- 07/08/06)
Another round of UN-mediated talks regarding Kosovo began on Monday (7 August) in Vienna. Delegations from Pristina and Serbia discussed decentralisation and minority rights, but the only agreement reached concerned naming police station commanders. 
"We have managed to clarify matters further," UNOSEK Senior Adviser Bernhard Schlagheck said after Monday's session. "Both Belgrade and Pristina delegations in a number of areas only reaffirmed their positions. In the major stumbling blocks, we made no distinctive progress," he said. 
The two sides did show some willingness to close the gap on police issues, Schlagheck added. 
 The negotiations went ahead this week despite a request from the Serbian side to postpone them until 14 August. Although there has been no clear cut explanation for the request, media speculation suggests that the Belgrade group wanted the minority rights discussion dropped from the agenda. 
Kosovo Serb representatives -- part of the Belgrade-led team -- said on Monday they would not accept minority status and were pulling out of the talks. The Belgrade part of the delegation remained for Tuesday's talks, but refused to discuss minority rights, saying these should not be addressed independently of the status issue. 
"The positions of the parties were conceptually far apart," Schlagheck said of the session. He expressed regret at the Kosovo Serbs' withdrawal, terming it a "missed opportunity to engage in a process which is of central importance for all of Kosovo's communities, not least the Serb community". 
One Kosovo Serb leader, Oliver Ivanovic, also spoke against the boycott. "Nobody can present the rights of anybody better then themselves," he was quoted as saying. 
Meanwhile, the London-based Minority Rights Group International has criticised the international community for failing to protect minorities in Kosovo. After seven years of UN administration, the situation there is "little short of disastrous", the organisation said in a report published on Monday. 
 It said the situation confronting Kosovo's ethnic groups, including Serbs, Albanians, Croats, Turks and Roma, remains the worst in Europe because the society is "so fractured that none of its people feel protected". 
The group called for concerted efforts to end segregation and for a strengthened rule of law to protect minority rights. 
 Southeast European Times correspondent Blerta Foniqi contributed to this report. 
