03/08/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 03/08/10
Danijela Mitic, a Kosovo Serb, works as a UNDP expert and lives with her husband and two daughters in Cagllavica, near Pristina. She said her family feels safe in Kosovo and they do not want to move. ]
In an exclusive interview with SETimes, Mitic talks about security and ethnic issues concerning Serbs in Central Kosovo and presents her view about Serb-Kosovo future relations. 
 SETimes: Two years after Pristina accepted the Ahtisaari plan which stipulates considerable autonomy and protection measures for the Serb minority, there are rumblings that Kosovo Serbs are not convinced that they can live safely in an independent Kosovo, and their view of the plan is distinctly negative. What do you think? 
 Danijela Mitic: Generally, the security level has significantly increased in Kosovo. Lots of Kosovo Serbs enjoy free movement in the country. They are coming to shop in Pristina and more and more of them are getting jobs in Kosovo institutions, especially under the decentralisation process. 
There are several indicators that isolation is no longer a case. For example, UNDP surveys show that Kosovo Serbs are fed up with the coverage of Belgrade based media and want to hear more local news. When you as a person are not isolated anymore you want to know more. 
People of central Kosovo are happy with freedom of movement and freedom of speech and their lifestyle is better. 
 SETimes: Have you ever experienced ethnic violence in Kosovo? 
 Mitic: No, I have not had any ethnic problems, and I visit Pristina very often, because of my work. 
 SETimes: Do you trust the Kosovo police -- which is predominantly comprised of ethnic Albanians? 
 Mitic: It is not matter of trust, but rather doubts about their capacities. I don't think they have the capacity to cover all investigations. 
 SETimes: Do you trust KFOR troops protecting Serbs in their communities? 
 Mitic: KFOR is just an additional security guarantee and I think they are now doing some useful projects, like small community support. But I definitely do not want to see them again on the street as they were before. When they are not in front of your eyes you don't think about them. I see this is as progress. 
 SETimes: Do you think many Serbs in south and central Kosovo plan to move out of the country? 
 Mitic: I think life conditions, not politicians, cause decisions. The times are changing and people are changing too. People are looking for better life opportunities. But as I said, now, more and more Serbians decide to stay. 
