11/11/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 11/11/08
A surprise agreement among Bosnia and Herzegovina's three largest political parties has drawn praise from EU officials, but Brussels remains concerned about resurgent nationalism in the country. 
Meeting on Monday (November 10th), the bloc's top diplomats urged authorities in Sarajevo to assume their responsibilities and push ahead with reforms needed for EU integration. They welcomed the agreement signed on Saturday but cautioned that it must lead to actual results. 
The deal is a "step in the right direction", EU security chief Javier Solana told the newspaper Glas Srpske. "We now expect that such a political agreement is implemented with concrete actions in relevant institutions." 
Milorad Dodik of Republika Srpska's Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD), Dragan Covic of the Croat Democratic Union of BiH (HDZ BiH) and Sulejman Tihic of the Bosniak Party of Democratic Action (SDA) signed the accord. Among other reforms, it calls for overhauling the country's constitution through a series of amendments, conducting a national census in 2011 and determining the status of the Brcko District. 
In a joint statement, the three leaders said they agreed on a wide range of issues, including harmonisation of the constitution with the European Human Rights Convention, the competency of the state, functioning of BiH state institutions, division of state property and the territorial organisation of the country, particularly for the middle levels of the government. 
They also saw eye to eye on drafting the state budget for next year, the statement indicated. 
The agreement came several days after French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner, Solana and EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn sent a strongly worded letter to the BiH presidency, urging its members to resolve issues that have blocked the country's progress towards integration. 
The international community's top envoy in BiH, Miroslav Lajcak, said the deal is "proof that compromise is possible when there is readiness for an open dialogue". 
The accord has stirred a mixed reaction among opposition parties, however. While the Serb Democratic Party supports it, the Bosniak Party for BiH and the Croat Democratic Union 1990 have both registered strong objections. They claim it favours Bosnian Serbs and is not in the interest of Bosniaks and Croats. 
In related news, EU defence ministers decided on Monday that the EU's peacekeeping mission in BiH, EUFOR Althea, should remain there until political stability is restored. The EU had hoped to trim the size of the mission, which began operations in December 2004, but political tensions in the country forced a reconsideration of those plans. 
On Monday, BiH presidency members Haris Silajdzic and Zeljko Komsic met with visiting British Foreign Secretary David Miliband, who said his country remains committed to BiH's European integration. 
