13/06/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 13/06/11
Many young people in Kosovo can only dream about playing sports at an international level. The country's athletics programmes are underdeveloped and even the most gifted athletes face an uphill battle in trying to build a career. 
Nevertheless, some have broken through. Adnan Januzaj, who currently lives in Belgium and plays for the Anderlecht youth football team, is an example. 
The Daily Mirror reports that Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson is snapping up this teenage sensation, already dubbed the "new David Beckham". The team reportedly had been scouting the 16-year-old for some time and has now offered the young midfielder a four-year deal to move to England, making him the highest-paid youngster on the team. 
"It was my dream to play for a team like Manchester United," Januzaj said. 
Other young talents from Kosovo are currently playing or signing contracts with international teams. 
Bekim Visoka, former Kosovo football player and current sports commentator, is both pleased and concerned. 
"I'm happy that [our] young talents have achieved such success in their early careers, and this is a good thing for the image of the country, especially in the time when you get bad news from Kosovo," he said. 
At the same time, however, he believes it is a sign that Kosovo is not offering enough prospects to its youth. 
"Many young talents play here in any given discipline, but no one is paid or has any future prospects here, which sends many abroad," Visoka said. 
"Many Kosovars, for political reasons, play for the Albanian national teams in football or other sports. They are discouraged from playing in Kosovo because they cannot participate in international competitions or matches, and, what is more important, they do not get the respect they deserve," he said. 
Kosovo's Majlinda Kelmendi, junior world judo champion, represents the Albanian flag in international competitions. Kelmendi, who ranked fifth in the World Masters Competition in January in Azerbaijan, did so well that the Azeris asked her to represent them in the 2012 London Olympics. 
"She can stay in your country [Kosovo] and come to Azerbaijan to participate in trainings before and during tournaments, and travel with our national team during championships and tournaments hosted abroad," Elchin Maharramov, assistant to the president of the Azeri Judo Federation, told SETimes. 
But Minister of Youth and Sport Memli Krasniqi has convinced Kelmendi to continue representing Kosovo and Albania. The Kosovo government and private companies will provide the financial support she needs. 
Kelmendi told the BBC that she wants to represent Kosovo next year in London. "I would be the happiest person in the world," she said. "We are a new state so it would be a perfect chance to show the world that in Kosovo, are a lot of young people who really can do good things." 
Agim Binaku, a sports journalist, thinks now is the time institutions in Kosovo and Albania must deal with such cases or risk losing their star athletes. 
That requires adequate funding, says Kosovo Olympic Committee chief Besim Hasani. "There are no funds to support anyone, as the comittee is waiting for the new budget from the government," he said. 
