07/02/2005
(The Times, AFP - 07/02/05; AP, Reuters, BBC, Eurosport, HINA - 06/02/05; The New York Times - 05/02/05; AP - 04/02/05)
Two days after winning the combined event in the 2005 Alpine skiing world championships, Croatia's Janica Kostelic was triumphant again Sunday (6 February), taking home the women's downhill gold. It was her first gold medal in the downhill event. 
The Croatian skier raced to first place with a time of 1:39.90, finishing 0.26 seconds ahead of Italy's Elena Fanchini. The winner of the World Cup downhill title last year, Austria's Renate Goetschl, won the bronze with a time of 1:40.29. 
"When I saw Fanchini's time I thought we might as well go home, I thought no one could catch that time," Kostelic said after the race. "But I was relaxed and had a smooth run, and to win a downhill gold medal is simply incredible for me." 
Kostelic, 23, returned to competition in November after missing an entire season due to health problems, including knee operations and thyroid surgery. Prior to that, she had won gold medals in combined and slalom at the 2003 World Championships. She has so far won 20 World Cup titles, including 17 in the slalom and three in the combined events, according to the Croatian news agency HINA. I
In addition, Kostelic made history at the 2002 Winter Games in Salt Lake City by becoming the first woman to win three gold medals in Olympic Alpine skiing competitions. She also won a silver in super-G. 
"The illness is a devil. It attacked all over her body," Janica's father and coach, Ante Kostelic, has said of her health problems. Neverthless, she defended her title in the combined on Friday, finishing with a winning total time of 2:53.70 seconds. Sweden's Anja Paerson took the silver, with 2:55.15 seconds and Austria's Marlies Schild was third, with 2:56.40 seconds. 
"I've always loved the downhill more than the slalom but then I got injured so I didn't do it so much," Kostelic said Sunday. "The downhill is special, there's speed and a lot of jumps and you enjoy yourself racing it, which is not always the case in slalom." 
Kostelic also admitted that despite the hard work she had invested in improving her downhill performance, she had not expected to win so soon. "Before, it wasn't like I was scared of the speed but now I feel more sure. I feel I can attack better and I have a lot more confidence in downhill than I used to." 
Kostelic's next event will be Tuesday's giant slalom. 
