05/09/2005
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times -- 09/05/05
Bulgarian Interior Minister Rumen Petkov on Friday (26 August) announced a series of measures his ministry and three other government bodies were undertaking in a bid to crack down on organised crime in the country. 
"We are adamantly committed to have a zero tolerance policy towards organised crime. We express our unwavering will to fight it with all legal means," Petkov said at a news conference Friday after a meeting of the leaderships of the interior and finance ministries, the Prosecutor General's Office and the National Investigative Service. 
The measures the heads of the four institutions agreed on include establishing the financial means and properties possessed by suspected crime figures and those close to them. The authorities would also investigate their tax and customs records, import and export operations and the insurance and bodyguard services offered by their companies. The surveillance and raids on known criminal groups operating throughout the country would be immediately intensified. 
The new measures were announced hours after the assassination of the head of VAI Holding and Lokomotiv Plovdiv Football Club owner Georgi Iliev. Shortly before midnight Thursday, the businessman was felled by a sniper's bullet while talking on a mobile phone at his own Buddha Bar at the busy Sunny Beach resort on the Black Sea, near the city of Bourgas. Dozens of people, including his bodyguards, witnessed the murder. 
 Iliev, 39, has been investigated by the police on suspicion of involvement in different offences, including car thefts and possession of forged documents. In 1986, he was sentenced to 11 years in prison for rape, but was released five years later. The former wrestler-turned-tycoon inherited his business empire from his brother, who was gunned down in 1995. 
"We had several operations on drug trafficking, especially of cocaine and links to Spain, and we have operational data which leads to him," Interior Ministry Chief Secretary Boyko Borissov said at Friday's news conference. 
Petkov insisted that the new measures were not prompted by Iliev's assassination, as they were drawn up prior to the incident. An interior ministry statement explained the move with the need for an active response on the part of the four institutions to the "complicated situation, linked to the prevention and solving of serious criminal offences". 
Iliev's killing is the latest in a series of about 60 bloody contract hits in the past four years. No suspects have been convicted over those cases yet. That fact has raised concerns among Western diplomats, who attribute the failure to corruption in the judiciary. 
Bourgas police head General Krassimir Petrov said Iliev's assassination was linked to the killings of another alleged mafia boss and two bodyguards in a packed cafe in Sofia last month and possibly to a bombing at another Black Sea resort several weeks earlier that killed a local businessman's wife and baby daughter. 
Some police officials say the crime groups in Bulgaria are fighting for new territories of influence, particularly in the drug business. They predict more killings as the turf wars continue. 
However, other explanations have also been offered. Tatiana Doncheva, a prominent lawmaker from the ruling Bulgarian Socialist Party, believes the killings could be an attempt to wipe out any traces of how powerful business figures amassed their fortunes during the "initial accumulation of capital" following the end of communism in Bulgaria in 1989. 
The EU has warned the Balkan country that it must deal with organised crime if it wants to join the Union in 2007 as scheduled. 
Ten days after being appointed interior minister on 16 August, Petkov announced his proposals for structural changes within the ministry. Outlining the fight against organised crime as a key priority for his ministry, he cited the lack of co-ordination among the different police services as a critical weakness. 
One of the key changes Petkov proposed is the establishment of a general police department, incorporating several structures, such as a central service for fighting organised crime. The main tasks of the service would include dealing with criminal groups operating inside the country, combating transborder organised crime and participation in joint operations with partner services and with the law enforcement agencies of EU member states and countries in the region. 
Other structural changes include the establishment of a separate criminal police division, which will also be part of the general police department, as will be the gendarmerie. 
"Prevention will be the main principle in the work of the ministry," Petkov said. 
Naming continuity as another guiding principle, the minister has decided not to change the heads of the separate departments and divisions. Borissov and deputy minister Boyko Kotsev will also stay on. Three new deputy ministers are expected to join the minister's team following Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev's approval 
