21/06/2011
By Esra Serez for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 21/06/11
Markets saw the AKP victory in Turkey's June 12th general elections as an indicator of political stability, according to analysts in the country. They say the results were in line with expectations. 
Concerns exist, however, that attention may drift away from urgent economic issues as the AKP concentrates on building political alliances and a host of other pressing issues. 
"We sent a very strong signal to foreign markets that the government will be strong," commented Zumrut Imamoglu, an economist at Bahcesehir University's Economic and Social Research Centre (BETAM). 
"The elections ended in line with the market's baseline scenario," said Nilufer Sezgin, Ekspres Invest's chief economist. "However, Prime Minister Erdogan said they would seek compromise with other parties. This means that the concentration of the government may be distracted from the measures needed to rebalance the economy towards more sustainable growth." 
Major business associations, including the Turkish Business and Industry Association (TUSIAD) and the Union of Chambers and Commodity Exchange of Turkey (TOBB) urged political parties to reach consensus on a new civilian consitution. 
Economists say the government has no time to lose, and must immediately take measures to address the rising current account deficit and emerging inflation risk. 
The seasonally adjusted current account deficit widened in April to $7.7 billion from $4.4 billion in the same month of 2010, according to data published by Turkey's Statistics Board (TUIK) on June 13th. The deficit was the second-biggest since records began in 1984, after a record $9.8 billion in March. It more than doubled in the January-March period, surging to an all time high $29.6 billion. 
"I am afraid the government is too ambituous, and will continue with its rapid-growth [encouraging] strategy," said Erinc Yeldan, an economics professor at Bilkent University, adding that strong and painful measures should be taken in the banking and financial system. 
To address the current account issue, the government should announce less spending in the short run, according to Imamoglu, who said this would also help to reduce corruption. Another possible measure would be raising taxes, she said, adding that this could especially be applied on imported goods, by increasing the special consumption tax. 
Meanwhile, Sezgin said, "the longer term tools can vary from labour market reforms to supporting import-substitution, which would increase output and improve efficiency." 
Amid ongoing debate on whether the economy is overheating, there are also market expectations that Turkey's Central Bank (CBT) might raise interest rates, particularly since its strategy to increase reserve requirements has yielded almost no results. 
But not everyone agrees. "Despite all expectations in the markets that the central bank will hike up interest rates, I expect it to keep rates constant," Inan Demir, Finansbank's chief economist, told SETimes. "The CBT will realise the economy is slowing down; hence there will be no need to raise rates." 
Demir referred to the decline in April's industrial output index by 0.6%, compared to the previous month, with its three-month cumulative drop reaching 2.9%. 
Such a decrease was unavoidable, as exporting firms are disfavoured by the ever increasing current account deficit, according to Yeldan. 
In order to assess whether the economy is overheated, one must make a distinciton between foreign and domestic demand, Imamoglu said, adding that while the first remains weak, the latter has heated up and is "much above its trend". 
"Eventually, the central bank will raise interest rates, but it wants to postpone this as much as possible. Thus the crucial question becomes when it will do so," Imamoglu said, adding that the recent increase in foreign exchange rates would be a good excuse for the CBT to increase rates. "This will also depend on how fast fiscal policy tightens." 
As it will take AKP more than a month to establish the new government, no measures are expected until then. 
"This one month will allow us to see whether the slowdown observed both in Turkey and in other economies is sustainable or not," Demir said. 
