06/12/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 06/12/10
With early elections around the corner, Kosovo officially kicked off a ten-day period of campaigning Wednesday (December 1st). The election commission has certified 29 political parties and groups and a total of 1,265 candidates seeking seats in parliament. 
Acting President Jakup Krasniqi launched the campaign process, telling voters that with these first general elections since declaring independence in February 2008, Kosovo "is entering, once again, in a difficult democratic test". 
He underscored the need for stable institutions, capable of facing significant challenges ahead such as democratic and economic development, implementing the rule of law, membership in the UN and other international organisations and Euro-Atlantic integration. 
He appealed to all political parties to campaign according to established rules, without provoking hatred or intolerance. 
"The successful conclusion of the elections ... is a guarantee for building and consolidating the representative institutions, which will lead our country towards new and historic achievements," he said. 
Incumbent Prime Minister Hashim Thaci has made the Euro-Atlantic perspective a cornerstone of his campaign. He describes his Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) as "a party of integration, which will lead Kosovo towards ... NATO and the EU". 
Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK) leader Isa Mustafa told supporters that a victory by his party would ensure Kosovo has an "honest government, economic growth, integration in the EU and prestige ... in the world". He has also vowed to fight for visa liberalisation and against organised crime. 
The Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), whose chairman, Ramush Haradinaj, is facing retrial for war crimes in The Hague, started its campaign by asking voters if they are better off now than before. Blerim Shala, AAK deputy chairman says Kosovo has never had richer politicians in power and poorer citizens. 
"We swear that in four years, you will live much better than today," Shala said. 
Businessman Behgjet Pacolli's Alliance for New Kosovo is asking the public to change Kosovo's image. Deputy chairwoman Mimoza Kusari-Lila said her party guarantees economic growth, new jobs, better education, better health care, the rule of law and much more. 
The radical Vetevendosja (Self -determination) movement kicked off its campaign in Mitrovica saying the divided city is not the problem, but rather is the beginning of the solution to Kosovo's problems. 
Movement leader Albin Kurti told supporters that the will of the people is bigger than that of institutions. "That's why it should not be left out of the institutions; it should be inside and around them," he declared. 
The new party FER (New Spirit) -- founded only in October -- played up its political infancy by choosing the monument NEWBORN as its symbol and vowing to "turn our words into concrete acts". 
"Change starts with Kosovo citizens," said FER's Valdete Idrizi. 
The European monitoring agency ENEMO has been on the ground throughout the campaign and will be working on Election Day as well, along with thousands of domestic observers monitoring the vote itself and afterwards, the count. Supporting them are 70 long term observers from the network of NGOs Democracy in Action and 63 people monitoring campaign spending. 
