09/04/2009
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 09/04/09
On April 7th, 17 years ago, then-US President George H. W. Bush announced that his country would recognise Bosnia and Herzegovina. The United States was one of the first states -- following the European Community by a day -- to recognise the independence and territorial integrity of BiH. As of April 7th 2009, 132 countries around the world have recognised BiH, and it has established diplomatic relations with 70 countries. 
BiH gained full UN membership on May 22nd 1992. It thereby acquired specific rights enshrined in the UN Charter, including the right to sovereignty and right to self-sustainability. 
"We can remember how much encouragement BiH's citizens derived in the hardest times of its recent history from the [United States]' recognition of its independence, territorial integrity and sovereignty," House of Representatives Deputy Adem Huskic said on Tuesday (April 7th) in marking the anniversary. 
 "We are also proud that BiH has become a partner in places where peace has been at risk. This is also the opportunity to remember and honour the US soldiers who have built their lives into the peace we now have. We can particularly remember ... Robert C. Frasure, Joseph Kruzel and Nelson S. Drew," Huskic added, referring to a trio of US diplomats killed in a car crash in 1995. 
 Huskic also expressed satisfaction that Washington has a Congressional Caucus for Bosnia -- further strengthening the friendship between the two countries. 
"I am convinced that our friendship will continue to exist in the future," Huskic said. 
The Congress of North American Bosniaks (CNAB) also issued a statement Tuesday, noting the important date for Bosnia and Herzegovina. "Significant support of the American public during the aggression against Bosnia resulted in the American intervention that stopped the aggression and genocide," the statement said. 
"We should commemorate [this] day through remembrance of many American legislators such as the late Congressman Frank McCloskey, a great proponent of the Bosnian cause, as well as American troops stationed in Bosnia who were there as part of the peace effort," the CNAB said. 
