07/02/2011
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/02/11
Zoran Dragisic, an adviser to Belgrade's negotiating team in the upcoming talks with Pristina, is a professor at the Belgrade Faculty of Security. He is also a programme director at the International Institute for Security -- an NGO staffed by international security and defence experts. 
 In a wide-ranging interview with SETimes, he voiced concerns over the potential deterioration of security in Kosovo, fearing violence against Serbs in the north. 
 SETimes: What is your view of the security situation in Kosovo? Are there any security risks for Serbia and the region? 
 Zoran Dragisic: At the moment, the security situation in Kosovo is not bad. However, the political situation is difficult and complicated, so violence could erupt at any moment. 
 After the report by Council of Europe Special Rapporteur Dick Marty on the trafficking in organs of Kosovo Serbs, there is a security threat posed by the reawakening of Albanian patriotism. I expect serious problems -- Marty has kicked a hornets' nest. 
The group that runs the human organ trade [includes] serious and dangerous criminals and if a move is made against them, and everything indicates it will be, patriotism will reignite. There are already voices shouting that an attack on Hashim Thaci is an attack on all Albanians. I'm afraid of the scenario already being announced in Kosovo, the so-called "Kosovo storm" -- a mass assault on Serbs in northern Kosovo, total ethnic cleansing. 
That scenario, not so unlikely, would seriously destabilise Serbia. Kosovo is a big security risk because of the physical jeopardy of the local Serbs, and because of potential terrorism, given the increasingly frequent mention of radical Islamist Wahabi movements in Kosovo. On the other hand, Kosovo is manipulated by political rogues in Belgrade, who, for lack of any political ideas, are manipulating Kosovo in order to extend their own political life. 
 SETimes: The negotiations between Belgrade and Pristina are on the horizon and you are one of the advisers and strategists of the Belgrade negotiating team. Can those talks help to alleviate the current heated situation and improve security in Kosovo? 
 Dragisic: I hope the negotiations will succeed in easing relations. Serbia has taken a good and constructive approach; it is no longer rigid and is raising questions related to everyday life. The situation might calm down. 
 SETimes: Is Kosovo ready for the complete departure of international troops? What impact would that have on the security situation? 
 Dragisic: I am not sure the conditions for the full withdrawal of international troops from Kosovo will be created any time soon, even though their numbers have been decreasing conspicuously over the last few years. There's been no serious escalation of violence since March 2004. However, the political circumstances are such that violence can erupt at any moment. EULEX and the Kosovo police are not enough to prevent violence. More soldiers should be kept on standby in Macedonia and BiH in case. 
 SETimes: Should Serbia join NATO? 
 Dragisic: I think Belgrade is following a stupid policy of abandoning Euro-Atlantic integration. Had Serbia followed a smarter policy it would have become a NATO member by now, which would have significantly strengthened our position. We have a completely insane policy, which I do not understand, and which some have been trying to call military neutrality, but it is not. It's not enough to just say that one is militarily neutral. 
Serbia has a totally disoriented security policy, which is one of the reasons why our position on Kosovo is bad. We are surrounded by NATO member countries which are a one big military, political and security alliance that needs an enemy, and we are setting ourselves up as the ideal enemy. 
Euro-Atlantic integration is the only smart decision, given our geographic position. That is the only option that offers us and the region long term stability -- the option that offers solutions to economic, security and political problems. That, however, does not suit strong criminal lobbies, since accession to NATO and the EU entails ordering the state according to certain principles, meaning that things can no longer function the way they are now. 
 SETimes: Does Serbia have any security problems with its neighbours in the region? 
 Dragisic: Serbia has no significant problems with its neighbours. The only potential problems lie in relations with BiH, changes to the Dayton Peace Accord and the constitutional reconstruction of BiH, which has to take place. Bosnia will either become a normal country or dissolve. It would be very good for Serbia, instead of dismissing the idea of any changes to the Dayton Agreement, to decide what changes it finds acceptable. 
A change in the sense of federalising BiH, where Republika Srpska would remain a federal unit, is acceptable to Serbia and the Serbs. That way, the constitutive character of the Serb people in BiH is preserved. Serbia's stubborn refusal to accept any amendments to the Dayton Agreement will eventually put us in a position where we will have changes thrown before us, as a "take it or leave it". Then we'll start wailing and lamenting and relying on international law and Russian support. And we will end up the same way we have in the past. 
 SETimes: Do you fear the tensions visible in Sandzak, the region of Serbia with a majority Muslim population? And is Serbia, as Islamic Community of Serbia Mufti Muamer Zukorlic claims, violating the rights of the Bosniaks? 
 Dragisic: Mufti Zukorlic wields the greatest political influence in Sandzak and thanks to some of Belgrade's dumb moves, he keeps getting more opportunities to score points. Those moves give Mufti Zukorlic far more importance than he would otherwise have. 
One cannot talk about any violation of human rights in Sandzak, anything can be said of Serbia, but its minority communities are not discriminated against. Sandzak is a poor and highly underdeveloped region where I also see social unrest as a potential security threat. 
 SETimes: In your opinion, what is the biggest security problem in Serbia? 
 Dragisic: Organised crime -- a threat to democratic order. It has polluted politics and the media. It poses a danger of completely killing the institutions in Serbia. The attempt to control state institutions by way of dirty money is the most dangerous form of corruption. 
Organised crime can be found in every pore of society, but mostly in politics and economy. I am afraid that unless it does something about it, Serbia can fall into a new form of totalitarianism, which will be a consequence of organised crime, rather than of any major ideology, as was the case in the past. Behind all the violence we have recently witnessed on the streets of Belgrade is organised crime. 
The solution lies in a radical reform of the political system and electoral law, which will enable MPs to truly act as representatives of the people rather than as outlets of their parties' leaders. If one does not have strong institutions and control mechanisms, they will be devoured by organised crime. 
 SETimes: How much of a security threat is the economic situation? 
 Dragisic: Poverty is a major security threat. Low living standards, low purchasing power and high unemployment are good grounds for the development of all socially deviant behaviour. Poverty is to society what a weakened immune system is to a physical body. Everything sticks to poor people: disease, crime, corruption and extremism. The poor are far more susceptible to manipulation and the price of everything declines, hence one can illegitimately control social currents with much less money. Poverty and unemployment, the latter of which has already exceeded one million people, are both very serious security threats. 
 SETimes: Is Serbia threatened by social unrest? 
 Dragisic: Social unrest has been expected and announced in Serbia for a while now, but it hasn't happened. Unfortunately, no one in Serbia is rebelling, and that is very dangerous. It would have been better if we rose up and demonstrated against the poor economic situation and pressured the government and toppled it, as elsewhere in the world. 
Once piled up, problems explode, and there will be a disaster. That discontent will easily transform into radical nationalism and similar nonsense. We brought down Milosevic, but we failed to raise some basic questions and carry out an essential transition and changes. 
We have not yet exhausted all the possibilities in solving social problems without violence, but unless something is done soon, I am afraid it might be too late. 
