13/06/2011
By Ozgur Ogret for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 13/06/11
Now in its fourth year, Ergenekon has moved beyond the judicial and political arena, and expanded to the street, where it has divided people into camps. Thousands of pages of indictments, weapons and ammunition confiscated at secret locations alongside unending waves of arrests -- including military officers, politicians, journalists, academicians -- has created an ideal battleground for a war of conspiracy theories. 
Supporters of the process point to Turkey's historic tradition of military coups and believe the Justice and Development Party (AKP) was to be overthrown, upending Turkish democracy with yet another military intervention. In this version, if the organisation called Ergenekon was not exposed, a wave of political murders and terrorism would have occurred as part of a nefarious plot that would create the necessary excuse for military intervention. 
Critics of Ergenekon argue the military was not planning to conduct a coup and that Ergenekon is nothing but an invented conspiracy designed by the AKP to oppress and silence opposition. This view is buttressed by a common fear in Kemalist circles that the conservative AKP has a secret agenda using takiye (Islamist deception) to turn Turkey into an Islamist state. 
Ergenekon: coup plot or foreign conspiracy?  
 Viewing Ergenekon, however, as each side does through a black and white prism neglects the grey areas that are pertinent to a fuller understanding of the case. Answers to the question of what Ergenekon is exactly differ totally depending on who you ask. 
 "Ergenekon is the striking wing of an organisation organised among the secularist community, led by soldiers and the judiciary, that wants to continue the tutelary regime [and] carry out a coup by creating social chaos through manipulation," Etyen Mahçupyan, a columnist for the daily Zaman who frequently writes about Ergenekon, told SETimes, adding that he believes the ongoing case is critical for Turkish democracy. ".
" However, when SETimes asked Tolga Akalin, a lawyer for arrested Ergenekon suspect Kemal Kerincsiz, he argued "Ergenekon is Turkey being tuned to the new world order through law." The pre-AKP traditions of Turkey were in disharmony with the current global order, according to Akalin, who believes supporters of the previous order were eliminated from the system with an unlawful trial based on a nonexistent organisation. Akalin notes that similar plots were put in motion in Croatia, Slovenia, Serbia, Georgia and Ukraine, where trials based on alleged shadowy organisations committing murders were also held. 
Ergenekon before the AKP  
The Ergenekon investigation started in 2007 with the confiscation of a few dozen hand grenades at a shanty house in Istanbul, but the first mention of Ergenekon dates back to 1996, half a decade before the AKP was founded. Journalists Can Dundar and Celal Kazdagli reported on rumours of the alleged deep state on their weekly television show "40 Dakika" (40 Minutes), where the name Ergenekon was first mentioned. They questioned whether or not the urban chaos and terrorism that cleared the path for the 1980 military coup was actually an orchestrated plan. Retired navy officer and writer Erol Mutercimler was interviewed on an episode as someone who had researched the matter for 13 years. He explained how an Ergenekon member, a Turkish general, told him about the organisation for the first time, describing it as "an organisation above the Chief of General Staff, the ruling administrations, bureaucracy; everybody". 
Mutercimler said his own investigations led him to conclude that Ergenekon members included military and police officers, professors, journalists, businessmen and ordinary people. He was detained in the scope of the Ergenekon investigation in 2008, but was released after questioning. 
Ergenekon as a product of the Cold War?  
What Mutercimler said in the interview supports the theory that Ergenekon is one of several names for the deep state since the Cold War, such as such "Gladio" in Italy. Lawyer Orhan Kemal Cengiz, head of the Human Rights Agenda Association and columnist for the dailies Today's Zaman and Radikal, also believes Ergenekon is the latest incarnation of the deep state. 
He tells SETimes, "Starting with the 1950s, some organisations were founded in all NATO countries against the presumed Soviet invasion. Its name is the Special War Department in Turkey, Gladio in Italy and other names at other countries." This stay-behind organisation changed formation in later stages and included civilians after 1999, according to Cengiz: "It is a formation of the deep state that tries to both shape public opinion and direct political power through manipulation and provocation." 
"Akalin, however, disagrees with the theory, insisting "There is no deep state in Turkey, there are periodical deep formations." According to him, unlawful alliances featuring both state officials and civilians have occurred from time to time, but without consistency. 
The trial itself raises as many questions as Ergenekon US journalist David Judson, former Washington reporter for USA Today and former Chief Editor of two Turkish dailies, Referans and Hürriyet Daily News, offered SETimes a foreigner's viewpoint. 
 "On the face of it, Ergenekon is a long-overdue effort to establish the truth behind years of overt and covert meddling by the military in civilian affairs, the origins and conduct of the 'dirty war' in Turkey's southeast against separatists, the actors behind hundreds if not thousands of extrajudicial killings, and the murders of numerous high profile activists and journalists – possibly -- the slain Turkish Armenian journalist Hrant Dink, killed four years ago. This is the ostensible reason for the investigation, and strictly in terms of the need for a society to come to terms with its history, for justice to be had, it is a reasonable proposition." 
Although Judson believes in Ergenekon, he does not feel the trial is on the right track. "Scores of arrests without clear charges or indictments, detentions running into the years and a steadily expanding prosecutorial remit are deeply concerning, not only to many in Turkey but by human rights monitors and democratic governments in North America and Europe," he said. 
As a lawyer, Cengiz said he perceives another problem with the trial. "The prosecutors have merged all the coup allegations under this trial. However, when we look at it, we do not easily see the connections between all of these coup allegations and the organisation called Ergenekon." According to Cengiz, this confuses people. 
While he argued that for the most part the right people are under lock and key, supporting his theory by the lack of political murders since the trial began, Cengiz does not believe all of the alleged secret junta action that occurred during AKP rule was related to Ergenekon. 
 "The trial is successful by its political results; it prevented coup attempts against the AKP and seriously intimidated those who would attempt a coup. But I believe it is unsuccessful on legal grounds because it does not investigate the concrete crimes of the people sent behind bars." Many of the accused are connected to serious mass crimes of the past, Cengiz claims. 
According to Akalin, the Ergenekon case is anything but lawful as the investigation continues alongside the prosecution process he labels "a law scandal". The case will not come to a legal end according to him. "A trial thats investigation continues does not end," he warned. 
