17/01/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 17/01/08
Many Belgrade analysts believe that Sunday's (January 20th) Serbian presidential elections will decide the future of the country and its European integration. Nine politicians are running for president, but the favorites are Democratic Party leader and current Serbian President Boris Tadic and Serbian Radical Party deputy leader Tomislav Nikolic. 
Tadic, who took office in 2004, advocates Serbia's accelerated integration into the EU. Nikolic favours association with Russia and says Moscow should be invited to establish military bases in Serbia. Nikolic also announced that he would appoint Radical Party leader Vojislav Seselj, who is on trial for war crimes before The Hague tribunal, as prime minister-designate. 
Tadic and Nikolic agree on one matter -- Serbia will not recognise the independence of Kosovo. The province, which has a majority ethnic Albanian population, has been under UN administration since 1999. Kosovo Albanian leaders have announced that they will declare independence in a few weeks, in co-ordination with the United States and major European countries. 
The duel between the two frontrunners could be decided by a third politician -- Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica. Polls show that Tadic could beat Nikolic only with support from all ruling coalition partners, especially Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia. 
But Kostunica disagrees with Tadic's plan to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the EU if the Union sends a mission to Kosovo, as planned, to replace the current UN mission there. The prime minister insists that the EU cannot support Kosovo's independence and, at the same time, sign the SAA with Serbia. 
For now, Kostunica has chosen to back his coalition partner from the previous parliamentary election, Velimir Ilic, who is expected to get around 8% of the vote. 
Liberal Democrat leader Cedomir Jovanovic is the only presidential candidate in favour of Kosovo's independence. Like Ilic, Jovanovic stands to win about 8% of votes on Sunday. Five other candidates are expected to garner even less. 
By law, if none of the candidates wins more than 50% of the first-round votes, the top two candidates must go to a runoff. In that round, the candidate with the majority of votes wins. 
According to polls conducted by the Belgrade-based Center for Free Elections and Democracy, the race will be extremely tight. Nikolic is expected to have the advantage over Tadic in the first round with an estimated 1.15 million votes, while Tadic is expected to pull about 1.05 million. 
Turnout will play a major role in the outcome. A low turnout could benefit the Radicals, as they have highly disciplined voters. However, Strategic Marketing Director Srdjan Bogosavljevic said that the chances for Nikolic to win in the first round are very slim, since the remaining seven candidates would most likely "take away about 25% of the votes". 
Serbia "is essentially facing a serious turning point, if a power shift occurs," Bogosavljevic said. 
