23/03/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 23/03/09
Macedonians have apparently chosen Gjorge Ivanov of the ruling VMRO-DPMNE and Ljubomir Frckovski of the opposition SDSM to proceed to the April 5th presidential runoff, according to unofficial results. With 94% of the ballots counted, Ivanov had snared 35.1% and Frckovski 20.3% of the vote. Macedonia's electoral commission put voter turnout at 53.90%. 
In local elections, the VMRO-DPMNE won 23 mayoralties outright and leads in another 16 municipalities. The SDSM won four mayoralties and leads in 14 municipalities. The DUI, the ethnic-Albanian party in the ruling coalition, declared victory in several towns in western Macedonia. 
Aleksandar Novakovski, president of Macedonia's electoral commission, said the elections occurred in a calm, democratic and fair atmosphere. 
 Observers have repeatedly characterised them as crucial to Macedonia's bid for EU accession. EU Special Envoy Erwan Fouere said a botched presidential election, after the violence of the June 2008 parliamentary balloting, could cause Macedonia to miss "its train to the EU". 
The VMRO-DPMNE, DUI, New Democracy, and most of the smaller parties shared Novakovski's assessment. The opposition SDSM welcomed the absence of violence and intimidation but said this did not "necessarily" mean the elections were "entirely fair". It emphasised the importance of a similarly peaceful second round. Menduh Thaci, leader of the DPA, complained of a "huge police presence at polling stations". 
The VMRO-DPMNE hailed these as Macedonia's best organised elections since the country declared independence in 1990. It called them a guarantee of Macedonia's integration in NATO and EU and of its democratic development. 
The NGO Most deployed 3,750 observers at most of the 2,976 polling stations. It reported problems at only eight. 
Weather, though, figured in some areas. A blizzard on Friday and Saturday kept 103 polling stations located high in the mountains across Macedonia from opening at all, thwarting approximately 12,000 voters (less than 1%) from casting their ballots. Those polling stations will be open during the second round. 
