29/08/2011
(Dnevnik.bg, The Sofia Echo, Trud - 28/08/11; National Statistical Institute, Mediapool, CROSS Agency - 26/08/11)
Notwithstanding the recent warnings about an impending new global recession, the business environment in Bulgaria has generally improved this month, according to a report by the Balkan country's statistics office released Friday (August 26th). 
In August, Bulgaria's overall business climate indicator (BCI) rose 1.1 percentage points month-on-month, the state-run National Statistical Institute (NSI) in Sofia said. However, it is still 8.8 percentage points below its long-term average level. 
The BCI represents the weighted average of the composite indicators for the business environment in the industrial, construction, retail trade and services sectors. 
Its improvement in August was driven by a positive change in the indicator for the industrial sector, which rose by 2.0 percentage points to just 2.1 percentage points below its long-term average score. 
Retail trade one was up 10.8 percentage point from that for July, to stand 0.3 percentage points above the long-term average for this branch of the economy for the first time since the start of the global financial crisis in the end of 2008. 
The figures reflect the grown optimism among managers of companies in both sectors about the business climate in Bulgaria in the coming months. The expectations of heads of industrial plants are somewhat more moderate, the NSI said, citing a 2.3-percentage-point drop in the employment indicator for the sector in August. 
Managers of Bulgarian industrial companies have said that despite a drop in orders from foreign clients, their production activities are growing, due to an increase in domestic demand. 
"If the Bulgarian industrial companies have become more competitive, they will be less affected by the economic slow-down in Europe than those in other countries," Georgi Ganev, an economic expert of the Centre for Liberal Strategies, told Sofia-based daily Dnevnik. 
The combination of good results in the industrial and the retail trade sectors signals a possible pick-up in consumer demand as well, the economist said. But, it would be premature to confirm this as a tendency before the end of the tourist season and unless the level of retail sales remains high, according to Ganev. 
Unlike their colleagues in the industrial and retail trade sectors, the heads of construction and service companies remain pessimistic in their expectations for the current financial status of their businesses and the prospects of new orders in the next six months, according to the NSI. 
The indicator for the business climate in the construction sector fell 5.7 percentage points month-on-month in August, while that for the service sector was down 3.2 percentage points. 
The insecure economic environment and financial problems are cited as the main factors restricting growth in the construction sector. On top of that, there is also lack of demand for construction services. 
Experts in this line of business say that the prospects for companies operating in this sector will improve if they are able to adapt to the new market needs, including the construction of roads, sewage systems and similar facilities. 
