13/06/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 13/06/13 
Hundreds of Vasove Vode residents said they will maintain the human chain they have formed to prevent waste disposal trucks from entering the town, where 1 million tonnes of garbage has been dumped over the past seven years. 
"Citizens are keeping up the blockade but the police are constantly breaking it up and filing reports against them. We will maintain it and will not allow our municipality to be turned into a landfill," Gojko Cimbaljevic, a local participant in the citizen blockade which began last month, told SETimes. 
However, authorities said all activities are in accordance with the law and will benefit the municipality as they plan to use the waste to increase the area's energy efficiency. 
"It is a totally legal landfill that has stood there for years and the municipality has all the [necessary] documentation. We plan to invest more than 30 million euros in the construction of power plants that will produce energy from waste for our city. Of course, we need a good investor, but the project is almost finished," Vuka Golubovic, head of the Berane municipality which encompasses Vasove Vode, told SETimes. 
"The protests are totally unfounded and I am once again sending the message the waste disposal site will remain there," Golubovic said. 
But ecology experts said the landfill is becoming an environmental disaster. 
"An unbearable stench has now spread throughout the whole area, accompanied by billions of insects. You can imagine what will happen during the summer," Aleksandar Perovic, director of the ecological movement Ozone, a Niksic-based NGO, told SETimes. 
Perovic said authorities have disposed of not only communal, but also medical, animal and electrical waste. 
"There is no approval from higher levels of government that such waste should still be dumped at this point. They need to find another location. The human blockages by the locals are fully justified," Perovic said. 
The country has two sanitary landfills that meet environmental criteria, in Podgorica and between the coastal towns of Bar and Ulcinj. The total waste produced annually in the country is more than 193,000 tonnes, but roughly half that amount is actually collected; the uncollected waste ends up in the environment. 
The government has produced a strategic plan for waste management, which calls for creating eight waste treatment centres by 2020. 
"We now need to find some solution for the Berane landfill. The ministry never wanted the choice of location to fall within the competence of local governments, because this is their jurisdiction. But we want … the conditions in Berane to be resolved as soon as possible," Sinisa Stankovic, deputy minister for sustainable development and tourism, said. 
Environmentalists said the practice at Vasove Vode counters Montenegro's proclamation 20 years ago that the country is the world's first ecological state. 
"[It] exists only on paper," Kristine Blokus, a UNDP representative said. 
Should Montenegro operate a landfill in Vasove Vode? Tell us your thoughts below. 
