07/11/2007
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje - 07/11/07
The European Commission released progress reports Tuesday (November 6th) on membership candidates Croatia, Macedonia and Turkey, as well as on Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia and Kosovo. 
At a press conference in Brussels, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said the region as a whole has seen steady but uneven progress. 
"We still need to face major challenges, such as the Kosovo status process, Serbia's democratic development and state building in Bosnia and Herzegovina," Rehn said. 
Croatia would probably become the next country to join the EU, perhaps as early as 2010, he added. He made it clear, however, that other countries in the Western Balkans will have to wait until at least 2012. 
Countries aspiring to membership should take a close look at what Croatia has accomplished, Rehn suggested. The country is increasingly becoming a positive benchmark for others in the region, he said, although it still needs to speed up reforms in state administration and the judicial system. 
Albania, meanwhile, has made progress in reforming its judiciary and in fighting corruption, Rehn said, but much work remains to be done. In its report on the country, the EC recommends that constructive dialogue among the parties needs to be developed in order for the political system to function better. Long overdue electoral reforms must be completed, it said. 
In Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the first priority is to move closer towards signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA). "We need at some point of time to seriously start to work on constitutional reform to make the state more effective and functional," Rehn said. 
While some achievements have been made in public administration, progress in meeting the political criteria has generally slowed down in BiH, the EC found. Co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal has improved, however. 
The EC's report on Macedonia notes achievements in the fight against corruption and progress in establishing a market economy, but warns that continuing political tensions are delaying reforms. It does not mention a specific date for launching accession talks with the EU. "We need a more constructive and inclusive political dialogue so that reforms gather new momentum next year," Rehn said. 
Montenegro has done much to establish the necessary legal framework and institutions since gaining independence, the EC said. However, the country still lacks sufficient administrative capacity, has only just begun to reform its judiciary, and remains plagued by widespread corruption. 
Citing better co-operation in the hunt for war crimes fugitives, the commissioners have cleared the way for Serbia to initial an SAA, although more steps will be needed before the accord is actually signed. The EC's report on the country, meanwhile, points out a number of problem areas, including sluggish judicial reform, corruption, inadequate enforcement of human rights standards, and continuing ethnic tensions. 
As for Kosovo, Brussels said public administration there remains weak and inefficient, while corruption is pervasive and the human rights situation shaky. The EC reiterated its call for a sustainable solution that would ensure democracy and multi-ethnicity, while contributing to regional stability. 
Finally, Turkey has overcome a political crisis successfully and democratically, the EC said. However, it added, the country should renew momentum towards political reform, particularly those related to fundamental freedoms -- such as freedom of expression and religion. 
