22/04/2005
(Office of the High Representative -- 21/04/05 - 22/04/05; SRNA - 21/04/05)
Three days before the start of negotiations on police reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), High Representative Paddy Ashdown urged politicians in Republika Srpska (RS) on Thursday (21 April) to seek a compromise solution that will lead to an agreement. 
"Police reform is the last great reform necessary for Europe. This is the final hurdle for the RS and BiH to enter into the European path," Ashdown said, addressing the RS National Assembly. He also warned lawmakers that they had less than four weeks to decide which way they want to go. 
"There are two options: a bright future and a dark one," he said. "Membership in the EU is the only future that offers BiH prosperity, security, and stability. You can choose this option if you want to. But there is a black option, too. And you can choose that as well." 
The EU is expected to decide next month whether to allow BiH to start talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement, the first step towards eventual full-fledged membership in the Union. EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has indicated that if BiH politicians reach a successful deal on police restructuring, in line with EU principles, Brussels will give the green light for the talks. 
The three principles laid down by the European Commission (EC) for police reform in BiH are: exclusive police competency at the state level, but operational control at the local level; police areas drawn up on the grounds of operational efficiency, not political control; and no political interference in policing. The main goal is to make it easier for police to fight crime, Ashdown said. 
While those principles are fixed, the ways to achieve them are not, so there is much room for compromise, the top international envoy to BiH noted. "There is a lot RS can win from this if it wants to," he said. 
Referring to concerns in RS that police reform would be a step towards abolishing the entity, Ashdown insisted there is no such agenda. "There is no plot to open up, by clandestine means, the question of constitutional reform," he said. "This is not an attack on RS. There is no attempt to abolish the entities." Nor, he added, did it imply that the RS interior ministry had to be abolished. 
Rather, Ashdown said, it would bring benefits such as better equipment to fight crime and equal payment in the two entities for the same job. 
Citing the results of a new poll conducted only in RS, Ashdown said 79 per cent of respondents said they want BiH to join the EU and 51 per cent had voiced support for the establishment of a state level police service, if it would place the country on the path to Europe. "A clear 59 per cent of RS citizens think that criminals have more influence over politicians, than ordinary citizens," the envoy noted, adding that according to 77 per cent of the respondents, "Police need to do more to fight crime." This is what the three EU principles are designed to do, he added. 
Speaking to reporters later, RS Prime Minister Pero Bukejlovic said it is possible to find a compromise solution on police reform without changing the RS and BiH constitutions. 
