07/12/2010
By Ljiljana Smiljanic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka -- 07/12/10
In an unprecedented move last week, MPs in Banja Luka adopted an initiative to change article 79 of the Republika Srpska (RS) Constitution. The entity's constitutional department now has two weeks to prepare a draft. If lawmakers adopt it, a Croatian representative would take a seat beside parliament's president. 
 Parliamentary President Igor Radojicic says the move creates the potential for parliament to have a third vice president. 
"By this, all constituent nations will participate in government without discrimination, and the leadership will have a representative from oppositional parties," said Radojicic. 
The move aims to stem Croatian dissatisfaction with the participation of their representatives in governing the entity. 
 Earlier this month, when the entity's new parliament was formed, there were unexpected changes. The ruling Independent Union of Social Democrats (SNSD) decided to nominate a member of a Serbian opposition party to serve on the three-person parliamentary presidency -- a move that Croats say shut them out. 
The entity constitution stipulates that parliament should include two members representing the three constituent nations -- Serbs, Croats and Bosniaks -- and a third representing other ethnicities. 
After the move, a coalition of two Croatian parties -- the Croatian Peasant Party and the New Croatian Initiative (HSS- HNI) -- submitted an appeal to the Central Electoral Commission of Bosnia and Herzegovina (CIK BiH). 
The group is asking the commission to change the process of electing delegates to the RS parliament's Council of People. However, the problem remains as Croatians are still members of the parties from RS, such as the leading party Union of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD). 
 "By its changes, CIK made possible for the SNSD to take over two representatives of Croatian people from the town of Kotor Varos, and it gave them an opportunity to choose in the Council of People," said Tomislav Tomljanovic of the HSS-NHI. 
An answer may not be forthcoming, as the election commission said HSS-NHI should submit its appeal to the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina. If the Council of People is not formed, then the RS parliament is not complete and no decision of the parliament can be enforced, including the decision on constitutional changes. 
"What has been done with the Council of People is slowing down the whole procedure. Delaying delegates election means being late in constituting Council of People, which means being late in forming RS government, economic policy, budget and everything else," Radojicic said. 
