03/01/2011
By Alina Radu for Southeast European Times in Chisinau -- 03/01/11
A new year brings a new government to Moldova, as the country's pro-European parties strike a deal to revive their alliance. The agreement was hammered out on Thursday (December 30th) among the leaders of the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), the Democratic Party (DP), and the Liberal Party (LP). 
Marian Lupu, head of the DP, has been voted in as speaker of parliament and will serve as interim president, while the LDP's Vladimir Filat is set to become prime minister. 
 It took more than a month of negotiations to reach an agreement following the country's November 28th general elections. 
The new government -- which should be formed within weeks -- will continue with the policy of European integration, according to the LP's Mihai Ghimpu. 
"The new alliance is a very good sign for all citizens of Moldova, as well as for Moldova's European partners," Leonid Litra, political analyst and head of the Institute for Development and Social Initiatives told SETimes. "The people of Moldova are seeing an end to the situation of political instability which paralysed the activity of governmental bodies in recent days." 
Nevertheless, he added, the country's shaky political situation remains a concern. The alliance only commands 59 votes out of the total 101 in parliament, and electing a president requires 61. Failure to vote in a new head of state would send frustrated Moldovans back to the polls. 
"We hope that the alliance finds a solution for the deadlock. They have to find the remaining two votes. May be the communists will vote too, because otherwise there should be re-elections," Litra said. 
But the Communists, so far, have not signaled that they are in any mood for compromise. They stayed away from the vote which elected Lupu as parliamentary speaker. Communist leader Vladimir Voronin said his party "did not agree with Marian Lupu as candidate". 
Some political analysts had thought Lupu might forge a deal with the Communists. But the DP leader decided to stay with the coalition. "Moldova is an independent country and we should deepen its sovereignty," Lupu said after the vote. 
EU Parliament member Monica Macovei, who is co-chairman of the EU-Moldova Parliamentary Delegation, told SETimes that the latest events are a good sign for further EU-Moldovan co-operation. 
"We encourage the alliance to continue the work for developing democracy in Moldova. It is the way to make life better for Moldovan citizens," she said. 
