20/03/2009
(US State Department -- 25/02/09)
The Greek government "generally respected" the human rights of its citizens in 2008, but problems remained in some areas, according to the US Department of State annual human rights report released last month. 
The report specifically noted an increase in the cases of cruel treatment of undocumented immigrants, asylum seekers and members of the Roma community by law enforcement officials. It also noted discrimination against ethnic minorities, exploitation of children, attempts to curb freedom of speech and religion and inadequate protection provided to domestic violence victims. 
Human rights watchdogs documented how "asylum seekers and migrants were regularly beaten during arrest and while in detention". Foreign street vendors also suffered "almost daily" abuse. 
Police corruption of various sorts remained a problem. In most cases, officers received "lenient punishments" -- suspended sentences or small fines -- or even an acquittal. 
The number of prisoners grew in 2008, reaching 11,800 in September, well above the system's capacity of 7,550. The often overcrowded and outdated prisons "continued to hold minors in the same cells as adults", the report stated. 
Although the law prohibits discrimination based on race, gender, disability, language, or social status, the government "did not protect these rights consistently in practice", the report said. It cited "women and children ... homosexuals and ethnic minorities, particularly Roma and undocumented migrants" as especially vulnerable groups. 
It further stated that Greek citizens of non-Greek ethnic origins generally cannot obtain recognition as "minorities" or "linguistic minorities". Athens historically has recognised only a "Muslim" religious minority and prohibits associations from using the term "Turkish" in their names, the study observed. 
The Roma community continued to face widespread governmental and societal discrimination, including systematic police abuse such as raids, illegal evictions and demolition of their homes, said the report. 
 "The Greek government was not consistently committed to children's rights and welfare," the report said, saying the country's youngest citizens "were vulnerable to homelessness and labour exploitation". The report also cited research finding that nearly two-thirds of Romani children did not attend school; 90% are illiterate. 
Traffickers shipped a significant number of women and children and some men to and within the country "for the purposes of commercial sexual exploitation and forced labour", the report said. NGOs estimated the traffickers had 13,000 to 14,000 victims at any given time. 
Other cited problems include domestic violence and sexual harassment. The report noted that the vast majority of harassed female employees quit their jobs rather than file charges. 
