07/07/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 07/7/06
Ecological tourism is a rapidly developing branch of tourism, appealing to those eager to follow the road less travelled, see natural treasures firsthand, relax in the countryside, enjoy traditional cuisine and -- most importantly -- preserve the environment. 
Such tourists are drawn to locations offering natural rugged beauty and diversity of animal and plant life. They enjoy activities such as cycling, mountain climbing, horseback riding, swimming, fishing and hiking. Alternatively, some come to plant trees or clean up the area.
Because of its unique geographical location, Croatia stands to benefit from this emerging trend. It is a country of great regional diversity, with mountains, lowlands, coastlines, rivers and lakes. Summer tourism is usually concentrated along the coast and centres on the sea and islands. Now, however, ecological and rural tourism is leading more and more visitors to turn their focus inland.
Across the country, cabins, motels and even small castles are being opened, while traditional old houses are undergoing renovation. Guests can relax and take in the scenery while enjoying domestic cuisine prepared according to the specific customs of each particular area.
Ecotourism is growing rapidly and will be profitable in years to come, says the owner of one rural house near Zagreb. Croatia's coming entry into the EU means more financial support for these endeavours, as well as the likelihood of more visitors.
However, this style of tourism is not only about enjoyment. It also aims at developing greater awareness of and responsibility towards the natural environment. The United States, for instance, has an organisation called "Green Hostels" that how to travel responsibly by following certain ecological rules. 
These include using organised transport rather than renting cars, cleaning up waste, and conserving water while showering. While eco-tourism remains a new phenomenon in Croatia, over time it may help foster similar awareness in this country too.
