08/06/2004
By Beth Kampschror for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 08/06/04
While Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) two post-war entities are struggling to implement legal reforms, the Brcko District -- a 439sq km area in the northeast -- has been using a reformed system for several years.
Brcko's contentious and strategic location on the Sava River -- linking eastern and western Republika Srpska -- meant that the Dayton Accord that ended the 1992-1995 war did not encompass the area, leaving it to international arbitration. In 2000, Brcko became a district, a sort of condominium shared by both entities but under the direct authority of neither.
The US government project that created the rule of law in Brcko took a bulldozer approach in 2001. It introduced general reappointment, which meant sacking all the judges and prosecutors and starting from scratch. That cleared out about 80 per cent of the ranks. New criminal procedure codes abolishing the investigative judge and giving the prosecution a strong role were imposed. Plea bargains were introduced to reduce court backlogs.
"There was nothing to think about -- it was a question of having to do it. It was 'take it or leave it'," said Nada Majinovic, a lawyer at Brcko Legal Aid, which was created by the reforms to give free legal counsel to the poor. She noted that though such an office is an essential part of legal reform because of the large numbers of indigent clients, the entities don't yet have such offices.
Now, backlogs have vanished. Corruption and bribery are considered non-existent. The court system is independent of government meddling. The annual budget -- 3.6m euros this year -- goes directly to the district government's finances department without any tinkering by assembly members.
"In the beginning, there was a little bit of resistance from the government in regards to our independence," Majinovic said. "But after about a half year, they accepted it."
In 2002, USAID transformed Brcko's former army barracks into a court complex with taping rooms for witness questioning, clerks' offices and courtrooms. "We're very well technically equipped thanks to USAID," said head prosecutor Zekerija Mujkanovic. "These office conditions allow us to do our jobs well."
Brcko's good court system has also inspired investor confidence. The area is now one of the most prosperous in BiH, with higher average salaries than in either entity. But the small size of the so-called "Hong Kong" of the Balkans has meant one disadvantage for its court system -- perpetrators sometimes live outside the district's jurisdiction, meaning that the courts depend on the not-always-forthcoming goodwill of the entities.
It is hoped that jurisdiction problems will end once both entities and the district are implementing laws fully harmonised with those at the state level. "The only way to ensure the rule of law in BiH is to ensure a single legal space which is capable of tackling the single criminal space," said Office of the High Representative spokesman Oleg Milisic. "This process has included ensuring that the Brcko District's own legislation is fully harmonised with BiH and entity laws and in accordance with the highest international standards."
