21/02/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 21/02/07 
Albania is counting the votes after the local elections held Sunday (February 18th). The opposition Socialist Party (SP) has the lead in the main cities, including Tirana, Durres, Elbasan, Fier, Vlora, Korca and Berat. SP leader Edi Rama, running for the third term as Tirana's mayor, is ahead of rival Sokol Olldashi. Prime Minister Sali Berisha's Democratic Party (DP) claims victories in the smaller communes and municipalities. 
The elections have been closely watched by the international community. As Albania aspires to join the EU and NATO, holding fair and democratic elections in a post-communist country is a major concern. 
After the polling stations closed, the head of OSCE/ODIHR monitoring staff, Danish diplomat Jorgen Grunnet, concluded that Albania failed to meet all the international standards. 
"The parties did not fulfill their responsibilities according to the Code of Elections. Even though, the Election Day was quiet, followed only by a few small incidents, the voting process had many serious procedural problems," he said. 
According to an EU report, there were shortcomings in terms of both preparation and execution. 
"Albania's political leaders now need to improve the way they co-operate on electoral and other challenging reforms that Albania faces in the EU integration process," said EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn. He added that, "Respect for democratic principles is a fundamental commitment under the Stabilisation and Association Agreement which Albania signed in June of last year." 
Criticism also came from other quarters, including EU security chief Javier Solana, and Doris Pack of the European Parliament. 
Prime Minister Berisha described the election process as the best since the fall of communism in 1991."Albania won its first victory in terms of fair and free electoral standards," Berisha told reporters at a press conference. 
On Sunday, 2.9 million voters were asked to choose mayors and councilors from more than 1,700 candidates. The turnout was approximately 47%. Voting was monitored by 4,500 foreign and local observers amid tight police security, due to concerns over vote-rigging. 
