21/08/2006
(AP, Sofia News Agency, The Times, The Jerusalem Post - 21/08/06; AFP, Reuters, AP, The Wall Street Journal, Turkish Daily News, Journal of Turkish Weekly, Ynetnews, Mediapool, Darik Radio - 20/08/06; Sofia News Agency - 19/08/06; VOA - 18/08/06)
NATO members Bulgaria and Greece have signalled they would respond positively to a UN call for countries to contribute troops to the peacekeeping force in Lebanon.
UN Security Council Resolution 1701, adopted on 11 August, authorised the expansion of the 2,000-strong UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) to a force of up to 15,000 troops. 
Bulgaria is planning to send a squad of 50 soldiers, Sofia-based Darik Radio reported on Sunday (20 August), citing a government draft resolution. The Bulgarian contingent would be located at UNIFIL's headquarters in the village of Nakura near the Israeli border. Its task would be to guard humanitarian aid shipments, VIPs and convoys, according to the report. 
Expressing his country's readiness to provide troops to the expanded UNIFIL, Bulgarian Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev said on Saturday that Sofia wants some questions regarding the mission's mandate clarified before taking a final decision. 
"We have to discuss with the UN and the other contributing countries the military aspects of our participation," Stanishev told reporters after a cabinet meeting. 
Any decision on the participation of Bulgarian soldiers in international operations requires parliamentary approval. 
Suggesting it plans to respond positively to the UN request for troop contributions, Greece also called Sunday for more details concerning the mandate of the expanded UNIFIL. 
"We are inclined to participate in the peacekeeping mission in Lebanon," Greek Defence Minister Evangelos Meimarakis said in an interview with the Athens daily Eleftheros Typos, published on Sunday. "But the parameters and details of this mission must be made clear." 
Resolution 1701 outlines some general terms for UNIFIL's operation, including monitoring the cessation of fighting, supporting the Lebanese armed forces' deployment and ensuring that humanitarian aid reaches civilians. 
Greek Foreign Minister Dora Bakoyannis is scheduled to stop in Lebanon and Israel this week, as part of a trip involving visits also to Cyprus and Jordan. 
Her Turkish counterpart, Abdullah Gul, whose country is also considering a possible contribution of non-combat troops to UNIFIL, was in Israel on Sunday to discuss the ceasefire with Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni and Defence Minister Amir Peretz. He also held talks with Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas. 
Meanwhile, a statement issued by Olmert's office Sunday said that during a telephone conversation with his Italian counterpart, Romano Prodi, the Israeli prime minister had called for Italy to lead the expanded UNIFIL, which is currently led by France. Although France had been expected to form the backbone of the peacekeeping force in Lebanon, it reportedly has scaled down its possible contribution, pledging to commit 200 additional troops. 
"It is important that Italy should lead the international force and send troops to also oversee the Lebanon-Syria border crossings," the statement issued by Olmert's office said. 
Italy reportedly is considering sending up to 3,000 troops, making it one of the biggest contributors. 
