06/12/2004
By H. Ahmet Yilmaz for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 06/12/04
A furor has erupted in Turkey as a reaction to remarks by a politician who accused the United States of using atomic and chemical weapons in Fallujah and committing atrocities worse than those of Hitler and Mussolini. 
"Never in human history have such genocide and cruelty been witnessed. Such a genocide was never seen in the time of the pharaohs (of ancient Egypt), nor of Hitler nor of (Italy's fascist leader Benito) Mussolini," alleged Mehmet Elkatmis, a deputy of the ruling AKP party and a member of Turkey's human rights commission. 
Elkatmis offered no evidence to support his allegations, which the US and Turkish officials firmly rejected. But that didn't stop some Turkish media outlets from repeating them. Columnist Husnu Mahalli, from the conservative daily Yeni Safak, told readers that it was "ridiculous" for the United States to deny using WMDs in Fallujah. Other papers published sensational "confessions", purportedly by coalition soldiers, in huge type on the front page. In general, Islamist and left-wing newspapers and TV channels which oppose the US action in Iraq echoed Elkatmis's account of the operation in Fallujah, without double-checking his claims or providing witnesses, photos or other evidence to substantiate them. 
While most Turks appear sceptical about the claims, some radical groups have staged protests on the streets of Istanbul. Carrying banners that read "Killer Bush" and "Stop Genocide in Fallujah," crowds gathered in front of Beyazid Mosque -- a popular demonstration space for Islamist groups -- and burned US and Israeli flags. The Islamist Party SP (Saadet Partisi) organised a large demonstration on Sunday, with the participation of some of Turkey's labour unions. On Friday (3 December), 1,000 protestors marched to the British Consulate in Istanbul. 
The US Embassy said the accusations were groundless. "Such unfounded, inaccurate, exaggerated claims are not good for relations, especially at a time of strain when Turkish public opinion is so critical of what the United States is trying to do in Iraq," one US diplomat told Reuters. He also said Elkatmis had overlooked the fact that insurgents like those in Fallujah had abducted and beheaded a number of Turkish truck drivers in recent months. 
The AP quoted another diplomatic source, speaking on condition of anonymity, as saying there was no truth to claims the US had used chemical, nuclear or cluster bombs in Fallujah. 
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, also dismissed Elkatmis's statements. "These exaggerated claims like 'genocide' or 'atomic bomb' have no base. They only destroy the relationship between Turkey and the United States," Gul said. However, he also defended Elkatmis's right to speak freely. "In open societies everybody can say what they want," Gul told reporters. 
However, media standards are also at stake. The eagerness of some media organisations to repeat sensationalistic rumors without verification has raised serious concerns about journalistic standards at a time when Turkey -- which hopes to receive a date for starting EU membership negotiations at the Union's summit later this month -- is anxious to demonstrate how far it has progressed. 
