17/01/2005
(HINA, FT, The Guardian, The New York Times, BBC - 17/01/05; AP, Reuters, AFP, CNN, VOA - 16/01/05)
Croatian President Stipe Mesic has won a second five-year term in office, after defeating the candidate of the ruling conservative Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), Jadranka Kosor, in a runoff vote on Sunday (16 January). 
Preliminary results from the State Electoral Commission early Monday showed the incumbent winning 66 per cent of the vote, compared to34 per cent for Kosor. According to the Croatian news agency HINA, some 51 per cent of the 4.4 million eligible voters went to the polls. 
Once the electoral commission confirmed his victory, Mesic thanked his supporters and pledged to lead the nation into the EU. 
"I thank everybody who voted for me as well as all those who cast ballots. I am proud of the maturity of Croatia's democracy," the president said in an address to the nation early Monday. "Today Croatia is taking big steps into Europe and we now have to be united, we need a national consensus to achieve our objectives," he added. 
Mesic, 70, was first elected president in February 2000, succeeding the HDZ's late nationalist leader, Franjo Tudjman. He is credited with helping Croatia come out of its international isolation following the 1991-1995 conflict and for advancing democratic reforms during his first term, which saw the country become an official EU candidate. 
Croatia is scheduled to begin its accession negotiations with Brussels in March and is expected to join the EU in 2009, during the final year of Mesic's second term. 
A pro-Western reformer, Mesic -- a former Croatian prime minister and the last president of the former Yugoslavia in 1991 -- marched towards election victory, enjoying the support of the country's main opposition parties. 
"There are different parties and opinions, but strategic goals must be uniform," the president said after winning Sunday's vote. "My appeal to you is let's all head together towards a just, modern Croatia," he added. 
Kosor, who serves as deputy prime minister, conceded defeat before the election commission announced the results and congratulated Mesic on his victory. She also thanked Prime Minister Ivo Sanader for his support. 
"I thank Prime Minister Sanader for having the courage to put forward a woman as a candidate of the biggest and most historic Croatian party," she said Sunday night, addressing supporters at HDZ headquarters in Zagreb. "I'm proud to have maintained a high level of dialogue in my campaign. I have not spoken badly of my rivals." 
Sanader in turn thanked all those who voted for Kosor, viewing the results as an indication of strong electoral support for the HDZ. 
"These results show nothing but that the HDZ is the strongest political party in Croatia," HINA quoted Sanader as saying. He described Kosor as the most successful woman politician since Croatia's independence, one who had proven capable of facing a strong opponent like Mesic. 
"The people did not want the same party to have all key pillars of power," political analyst Zeljko Trkanjec said in comments for Reuters. "They wanted a head of state who will act as a corrective. And he will be well received in Europe."
