13/04/2007
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo –13/04/07
Since officially joining NATO's Partnership for Peace (PfP) in December 2006, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) has taken several formal steps towards full NATO membership. 
NATO Headquarters Sarajevo (NHQSa) Political Advisor Bruce McLane recently said that the Alliance recognizes the progress as a clear, positive sign that the country expresses not just pure political will but a concrete desire to co-operate in the PfP. 
"Among the new three PfP members, BiH is the first that already submitted its Presentation Document. Another crucial point was signing the Security Agreement with NATO," said McLane, about the steps that neighbouring Montenegro and Serbia have yet to accomplish. 
The Presentation Document outlines individual activities that a partner country selects to implement within the PfP framework, based on its ambitions and capabilities. Reportedly, BiH presented standard free usage of its roads, railways, sea and airspace for NATO, if needed. From its military capabilities, BiH offers the infantry personnel and expertise in the unexploded ordnance disposal and training in mine removal. 
The Security Agreement -- signed during NATO Secretary-General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer's March 16th visit to Sarajevo – provides the basics for any classified information shared between BiH and the Alliance. The agreement made it possible to open the official BiH mission to NATO at Brussels, which former BiH Defence Minister Nikola Radovanovic will head. Current Deputy Minister of Defence Igor Crnadak hopes the mission can be fully established this fall. 
McLane stressed the next step for BiH is to develop Individual Partnership Programmes (IPP). These two-year programmes are drawn up from an extensive menu of activities reflecting partnership objectives and priorities. It also touches on virtually every field of NATO activity, including defence policy and planning, civil-military relations, education and training, air defence, communications and information systems, defence conversion matters, crisis management and civil emergency planning as well as scientific co-operation. 
Crnadak said the IPP for BiH might be completed before the end of the month. He stresses that the most comprehensive job will be accomplishing the Planning and Review Process (PARP). For the PARP, the country must complete a form containing an extensive overview of its armed forces and detailed information of the forces which they are prepared to make available for PfP co-operation. 
"We will finish our first version of PARP before the end of April," said Crnadak. "Then it will be submitted to NATO to provide additional notes for further fine-tuning. After the end of the process our Defence and Foreign Affairs Ministers will defend the PARP at the North-Atlantic Council (NAC) meeting." According to Crnadak, BiH is already prepared to work on its Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP), which has wider political aspects and Crnadak believes BiH will be able to accept its IPAP in 2008. 
