02/02/2006
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 02/02/06
Tirana Airport Partners (TAP), an international consortium formed by two German companies, has an exclusive contract with the Albanian government for the operation and management of Tirana's Mother Teresa International Airport, the only one in the country offering international flights. 
The contract, signed in 2004, is a stepping-stone on the road to transforming Albania's international airport into an inportant connection point in Southeast Europe. The consortium pays an annual concession fee and, in return, is entitled to the airport's income. It has pledged to upgrade and modernise the facility. The Albanian government plans to "increase the co-operation with TAP, profiting from the experience of this strategic partner. We will guarantee our full support. Their success would be considered a success for Albanian authorities too," says Transport and Telecommunications Minister Lulezim Basha. 
Albania has been seeing a rise in the number of travelers, and TAP is negotiating to bring other airlines into the country, according to the consortium's executive director, Reinhard Kalenda. 
In recent years, Albania has drawn the attention of a number of international carriers. Austrian Airlines, Hungary's Malev, Greece's Olympic Airlines, Serbia-Montenegro's JAT, Italy's Alitalia, Slovenia's Adria Airways, Turkish Airlines and Bulgaria's Hemus Air all offer regular, scheduled flights to Tirana. Several domestic companies, such as Albanian Airlines, Albatros Airways and Ada Air, also offer direct flights to and from European cities. 
In 2005, UK flagship carrier British Airways (BA) announced it was launching regular direct flights between Gatwick Airport and Tirana. The flights, scheduled for Mondays, Thursdays and Saturdays, are expected to give a substantial boost to travel in and out of Albania. 
BA projects that 25,000 travellers will use the new London-Tirana route in the first year, with the number rising incrementally afterwards. 
Meanwhile, the government is also considering developing domestic air traffic in the southern cities of Saranda and Vlora, which are considered to be the top destinations for tourism in the country. Kukesi Airport, in the northeastern part of the country is under construction. According to the long term plans, all three airports will eventually become licensed for international flights. 
