15/11/2006
(News.bg, Monitor, Makfax - 15/11/06; Sofia News Agency, Europe.bg, Vseki Den, Dnevnik, Mediapool, Focus News Agency, Makfax - 14/11/06)
Bulgarian observers at the European Parliament (EP) are protesting a proposed change to the legislature's monitoring report on their country. The amendment criticises Sofia for discriminating against an alleged Macedonian minority. 
"We call upon the Bulgarian authorities to ensure that no obstacles for registration of the political party of the ethnic Macedonians will be placed, and that all discriminatory and abusive activities aimed at this minority will cease," the Macedonian news agency Makfax quotes the amendment as reading. It reportedly was triggered by Bulgaria's refusal to register a self-described ethnic Macedonian party, OMO Ilinden Pirin. 
The proposed change runs counter to a provision in Bulgaria's constitution that prohibits the establishment of political parties along "ethnic, racial or religious lines". While giving Bulgarians the right to "ethnic self-identity," the constitution does not recognise the existence of ethnic minorities. 
A Macedonian minority has never existed in Bulgaria, wrote four right-wing observers in a letter to all EP members. The signatories, affiliated with the European People's Party/European Democrats (EPP/ED) group, included Dimitar Abadzhiev, Maria Kapon and former Sofia Mayor Stefan Sofianski. 
The Bulgarian EP observers from the National Movement for Simeon II, Stanimir Ilchev and Hristina Hristova, joined their right-wing colleagues in calling for removal of the amendment. European practice allows people to be members of left-wing, right-wing or other political formations, but does not provide for the existence of ethnic parties, Hristova argued. 
The amendment was tabled by Els de Groen, Joost Lagendijk, Milan Horacek and Angelika Beer from the Greens/European Free Alliance group late Monday during a discussion on the report, which was drawn up by Geoffrey van Orden, the EP's rapporteur for Bulgaria. 
"The reasons for the introduction of the amendment for the recognition of the Macedonian minority are not political," de Groen said in an interview Tuesday with Bulgaria's Focus news agency. "The reasons that we suggested this amendment are related to human rights." 
"I should have proposed to my colleagues to add to the amendment that your country was the first one to have recognised Macedonia. Thus it would have been more complete," he added. 
