08/03/2006
(UN News Centre, Reuters, AP, VOA, B92, BETA, Kosovareport - 07/03/06)
UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari urged Kosovo's Albanians on Tuesday (7 March) to take immediate action to ensure improvement in the lives of the province's Serb and other minorities. This, he said, was a prerequisite for resolving the issue of Kosovo's final status. 
 In preparation for the start of the process to determine the province's future, the international community laid down standards in eight areas -- such as rule of law, democratic institutions, and human and minority rights -- that Kosovo was to implement for negotiations to begin. While acknowledging that none of the targets had been fully met, the UN Security Council in October decided the talks should proceed to prevent the political process from stagnating. 
"There are certain standards, like the protection of minorities and the improvement in their lives, that have to be improved now," Ahtisaari told reporters after briefing the Security Council on the first round of the negotiations and his recent five-day trip to Belgrade and Pristina. 
The process to determine the province's future status was launched about four months ago, and the first direct talks between Kosovo Albanian and Serbian officials took place in Vienna last month. Decentralisation was one of the key issues discussed at the two-day meeting and is expected to be agenda again at the next meeting, scheduled for 17 March, along with protection of cultural and religious heritage, minority rights and the economy. 
Between the two rounds, Ahtisaari consulted with officials in both Belgrade and Pristina, urging them to remain continuously engaged on the issue. 
During Tuesday's closed-door briefing, Ahtisaari told the Security Council that he was content with the first round of status talks, according to his spokeswoman, Hua Jiang. 
Independence and autonomy are among the status options mentioned for Kosovo, which -- although legally part of Serbia-Montenegro -- has been run by the UN since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict. 
Kosovo Albanians, who make up 90 per cent of the province's population of 2 million, are pushing for independence, while Belgrade, which wants to retain at least some sovereignty over the province, is offering it substantial autonomy. 
Speaking to reporters, Ahtisaari reiterated on Tuesday the need for Kosovo Serbs to begin participating in the province's political life. "That is, too, a very important message that we are continually passing on to them," Reuters quoted him as saying. 
Ahtisaari says both the Kosovo Albanians and Serbs share responsibility for improving the lives of minorities in the province. 
 "I made a visit to a municipality close to Pristina and I said there in my town hall meeting that to improve the education and health services and infrastructure in municipalities, you need money," the Voice of America quoted the UN envoy as saying Tuesday. "But to improve human relations, you need only will. That does not cost a penny." 
Later this week Agim Ceku is expected to become Kosovo's new prime minister, in place of Bajram Kosumi, who resigned last week. 
Returns Minister Slavisa Petkovic, the only representative of the Serb community in the Kosumi-led cabinet, has indicated that he is willing to join the next government. 
 Belgrade based Radio B92 quoted Kosovo Serb leader Oliver Ivanovic as saying on Tuesday that he and his political affiliates would be willing to meet with Ceku, realising that, if they want to help their community, they must participate in the political process in the province. 
