24/09/2007
(AFP, Reuters, AP, DPA, BBC, BIRN, Blic - 24/09/07; Beta, B92, AFP, Xinhua - 23/09/07)
A powerful blast struck a busy part of Pristina early Monday (September 24th), killing two people and leaving at least another 11 injured, a Kosovo official said several hours after the incident. 
 "The blast occurred at about 2 am in the business area in which some coffee shops and restaurants were still working," Kosovo Police Service (KPS) spokesman Veton Elshani told reporters. 
 Part of a two-storey business centre on Bill Clinton Boulevard in Pristina's Dardania district collapsed in the strong explosion, which also damaged vehicles and other buildings in the vicinity. Photos showed glass and debris scattered at the site. 
The victims are believed to have been in a nearby café, according to Elshani. One reportedly died on the spot, and the second at hospital. 
Joined by KFOR troops, the KPS sealed off the area and opened an investigation, but details about the type and amount of explosives have not been made available. 
According to reports, the explosion occurred near the café-bar Sekiraqa. Its owners are believed to be members of a local gang and are suspected of involvement in the late-August murder of an elite police officer. 
 Condemning the incident, authorities said there was no evidence to link the attack to the ongoing internationally-sponsored negotiations on Kosovo's final status. 
"There is not a single indication that the explosion has any relation with the political process that Kosovo is going through," the AFP quoted government spokesman Avni Arifi as saying on Monday. "The government is fully committed to fight against any crime and to create a peaceful environment." 
The incident occurred only days before Serbian and Kosovo Albanian leaders are due to meet for direct talks, on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly in New York on Friday. The negotiations process has been deadlocked for months, and prospects for a compromise appear slim. 
Amid growing frustration among Kosovo Albanians over the delayed settlement, the province's leadership has threatened to declare independence on December 10th. Belgrade, meanwhile, continues to oppose independence and is suggesting broad autonomy as an alternative. 
"Essential autonomy is our maximum offer," Goran Bogdanovic, a member of Belgrade's negotiating team said in an interview. "Anything more than that would mean independence or the creation of a state of Kosovo." 
