21/12/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 21/12/11
NATO has been controlling Kosovo air space since 1999, under an agreement with the Former Republic of Yugoslavia. It granted the international security force, KFOR, the right to control Kosovo's airspace and established an Air Safety Zone. 
Now the country is discussing the possibility of opening its high air space. In an exclusive interview, Dritan Gjonbalaj, general director of the Kosovo Civil Aviation Authority, tells SETimes there will be a temporary transitional period during which Kosovo will be supported by a partner country, under NATO supervision, to provide air navigational services. 
 SETimes: How is Kosovo's airspace currently controlled? 
 Dritan Gjonbalaj: Since the end of the war, the upper air space of the Republic of Kosovo (about 9km) has been closed to civilian aircraft overpasses and is under NATO authority. The area under [that] is controlled by the service provider Air Navigation at Adem Jashari Airport. Our air traffic controllers provide flying services and landing from Pristina, and services for other flights -- [mostly KFOR helicopters] -- within the territory of the Republic of Kosovo. 
Currently, entry and exit take place through two air corridors that connect us with Macedonia. Air traffic control of Kosovo's airspace is under regulatory supervision of the Civil Aviation Authority of the Republic of Kosovo. In carrying out our activities, we have excellent co-operation with KFOR, considering their responsibilities in this area which have been based on several international documents. 
 SETimes: Did you get any signals that NATO wants to give up the control of this space after almost 12 years? 
 Gjonbalaj: Since the declaration of independence, Kosovo authorities have been working closely with NATO, KFOR, the EU, ICAO and other stakeholders in the region, to normalise the Balkan airspace, and in particular, to open Kosovo's high air space to civilian aircraft overpasses. This activity takes place within the NATO initiative: Airspace Balkans Normalisation Meeting (BANM). 
NATO, like the authorities of our country, is very committed to the opening of the high air space. Great interest [has been expressed by] airlines because there are some air routes above Kosovo that have been historically used a lot in international air traffic. 
 SETimes: What would be the best solution for controlling Kosovo's airspace? 
 Gjonbalaj: The ideal solution would be to have the Kosovo Air Navigation Services assume control of Kosovo high air space tomorrow. But for this to happen, time is needed and therefore, there will be a transitional period, a temporary solution, whereby the Republic of Kosovo will be supported by a partner country, under NATO delegation, to provide air navigation services in our high air space for the overpasses. We believe that soon, the NATO Council will make a decision about the partner country, with which we will work in service delivery. 
 SETimes: What countries have expressed an interest in controlling the airspace of Kosovo? 
 Gjonbalaj: There are some states that have expressed interest in working with NATO and the Republic of Kosovo authorities in providing services in our high air space. BANM decided during its last meeting that the expression of interest to support Kosovo in the opening of its high air space should be done at NATO's headquarters in Brussels. 
 SETimes: Which one would you prefer? 
 Gjonbalaj: Our authorities have made it clear that Kosovo is interested -- within the NATO-led process -- in co-operating with a friendly country, a NATO member. The solution above all seems to be politically, practically and technically suitable for our country. 
There are many cases in the world and Europe when states contract providers of air navigation services from other countries to provide services in their air spaces for a defined or undefined time. Furthermore, all European countries are obliged by the EU applicable legislation to reorganise their national air spaces into major functional blocks of air, in order to facilitate the flight of aircraft and increase effectiveness and safety. Boundaries of national air spaces are being integrated and we are all moving towards [what is] called in the official EU terminology the Single European Sky. 
 SETimes: What would this change represent for Kosovo? 
 Gjonbalaj: Kosovo's sky is opening and this has great importance [given] that 10,000 sq km of sky are returning to the European mapping of air overpasses, through which very important air traffic passes. The opening of the air space is also important for the development and strengthening of our Agency of Air Navigation Services, because these services will also generate financial revenue. 
