10/01/2008
By Ayhan Simsek for Southeast European Times -- 10/01/08
US President George W. Bush met with Turkish President Abdullah Gul on Tuesday (January 8th) and said that the United States will continue to help Turkey in its fight against the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK). Bush also urged Turkey to seek a long-term political solution to the problem. 
"The PKK is a common enemy," Bush said, following his meeting with Gul. "It's an enemy to Turkey, it's an enemy to Iraq, and it's an enemy to people who want to live in peace." 
Gul, the first Turkish president to visit the White House in nearly 12 years, agreed. "We are working against our common enemy, the PKK, and I would like to thank the president for his determination in this regard," he said. 
The NATO allies have recently fostered closer co-operation to fight the terrorist group -- a move that has helped ease strained bilateral relations and improve the US image in Turkey. 
 Since December, the Turkish General Staff has confirmed three air strikes conducted with US intelligence assistance against PKK camps in northern Iraq. 
The PKK, which is classified as a terrorist organisation by the United States, the EU and much of the international community, has waged a bloody campaign for Kurdish self-rule in southeast Turkey since 1984. 
During the meeting, Bush urged Gul to seek a long-term political solution to the decades-old problem. 
White House spokeswoman Dana Perino said the US administration is encouraging Turkey to pursue more talks with the Kurdish and Iraqi leaders. However, she also stressed that the United States does not foresee a dialogue with the terrorist organisation. 
Tuesday's talks signaled a new period between the two allies. The two leaders highlighted strategic ties and implied that the period of instability over disagreements on Iraq and PKK has ended. 
 "I view Turkey as a bridge between Europe and the Islamic world, a constructive bridge. And so I believe it's in the interest of peace that Turkey be admitted into the EU," Bush said. 
Sedat Ergin, editor in chief of Turkey's Milliyet daily, said Gul's visit has been largely positive. "The most important result of the Bush-Gul meeting is that it has clearly put an end to the turmoil between the years of 2003-2007," he said. Energy security and co-operation has become one of the main topics of the US-Turkey agenda, besides a closer co-operation on Iraq, he added. 
Faruk Logoglu, Turkey's former ambassador to Washington, said the new US policy towards Iraq -- which has a strong emphasis on unity and the integrity of Iraq -- has created a new climate in ties between the US and Turkey. 
"US action against the PKK is, in fact, a result of this new approach towards Iraq," Logoglu, said, adding that the two allies share similar concerns on many other regional issues, including Iran's nuclear programme. 
