19/02/2007
(Zaman, Turkish Daily News, The New Anatolian - 19/02/07; VOA - 18/02/07; Reuters, AFP, AP, RFE/RL, Turkish Daily News - 17/02/07)
Turkish Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul has denied speculation about a rift between the government and the country's military over how Ankara should deal with the Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK) terrorists in northern Iraq. 
"Our prime minister, chief of staff and I all agree," Turkish media quoted Gul as saying on Monday (February 19th). 
Recent statements by Turkish military commander General Yasar Buyukanit, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Gul himself on how to approach the Iraqi Kurds over the PKK were seen as conflicting. 
During a visit to Washington last week, Buyukanit said two parties -- those of Massoud Barzani, the leader of the Kurdish regional government in Iraq, and of Iraqi President Jalal Talabani -- were supporting the rebels in northern Iraq and that the border between that region and Turkey is completely unguarded. He also hinted that Turkey could take unilateral military action against the PKK, who have been using their bases in northern Iraq as a springboard for attacks inside Turkey. 
"There are no Iraqi security forces guarding the other side of the border," the general said following talks with US officials Thursday. "The Iraqi side has been handed over to the PKK. If the PKK is taking advantage of that to harm our people, it becomes a necessity for Turkey to take measures,"he said. 
The PKK is outlawed in Turkey and is recognised as a terrorist organisation by both the EU and the United States, which recently urged Turkey to seek a solution to its problem with the militants through dialogue with the Iraqi Kurd authorities. 
Last week, Erdogan suggested Ankara was ready to discuss the issue with the Kurdish regional government in Iraq, but Buyukanit rejected this as an option. 
For his part, Gul reiterated the government's will to pursue dialogue with the Iraqi Kurds to achieve a solution to the problem via political means. "Soldiers speak with weapons ... but before this point is reached politicians and diplomats have work to do," the minister was quoted as saying on Saturday. 
Meanwhile, Voice of America (VOA) reported on Sunday that Kurdish officials in northern Iraq denied Buyukanit's accusations that the PKK enjoys the support of Barzani and Talabani's parties. 
 Expressing the Iraqi Kurd authorities' readiness to talk with Ankara, Falah Bakir, director of the office of foreign relations of the Kurdish regional government in Iraq, said however that the dispute with the PKK is not a domestic issue. 
 "It is a Turkish issue," Bakir told the VOA. "Therefore, we are not part of this problem." 
