24/02/2010
(AFP, AP, CBC, DPA, UPI, BBC, RTTNews, AKI, Telegraph, Euronews, Beta, B92, Radio Srbija -- 23/02/10)
Serbian police on Tuesday (February 23rd) searched the Belgrade family home of former Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko Mladic, who faces genocide and other war crimes charges handed down by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
The raid began at dawn, when several dozen armed special officers surrounded Mladic's house in the capital's Banovo Brdo suburb, sealing off the entire block. Mladic's wife, Bosa, and their son Darko were reportedly inside the building during the search, which lasted more than eight hours. 
Serbian officials said the operation was part of the regular activities of the action team tasked with capturing Mladic and former Croatian Serb rebel leader Goran Hadzic, the other war crimes suspect still sought by The Hague-based tribunal. Both are believed to be hiding in Serbia. 
Authorities say they are unaware of the fugitives' whereabouts and that they are making every effort to arrest and hand them over to the UN tribunal. 
Tuesday's search was aimed at tracking down the financial support network that has been helping Mladic evade justice, Serbian war crimes prosecutor Vladimir Vukcevic told the Belgrade-based news agency Beta. 
"The purpose [of the operation] is to sever the financial channels and support to … Mladic, the possible discovery of evidence of this and of documents that are interesting for us," he said. 
 Svetozar Vujacic, Mladic's lawyer, told B92 that, "a number of CDs, cassettes and organiser books, as well as a certain amount of money" were confiscated during the raid. He denied, however, earlier media reports that police had found at least 70,000 euros in cash in the house, insisting it was actually a "much smaller sum". 
Mladic, who was indicted by the tribunal about 15 years ago, lived freely in Belgrade under Serbian nationalists' protection until early 2006, when he disappeared. He faces a 15-count indictment charging him with a host of war crimes, including genocide over his role in the 1995 Srebrenica massacre. 
In July 2004, UN prosecutors charged Hadzic with 14 counts of war crimes for his alleged involvement in persecution, murder, torture, inhumane acts and other atrocities committed against Croats and other non-Serbs during the 1991-1995 war in Croatia. He disappeared from his Novi Sad home three days before his indictment was made public, as Serbian authorities were about to arrest him. 
Full co-operation with The Hague tribunal, including arresting indicted war criminals, is a key condition for Balkan countries hoping to join the EU. 
The 27-nation bloc has made it clear to Serbia, which submitted its official application for membership in December, that it must capture Mladic to be able to move ahead along the accession path. 
The latest publicly-known search operation targeting the former Bosnian Serb military chief was conducted in Novi Sad last October, while the last time his Banovo Brdo home was raided was in December 2008. 
Serbia's Military Security Agency head Svetko Kovac told parliament Tuesday that there was "no information to indicate that any ICTY suspects are hiding in military facilities, nor that members of either the army or ministry of defence are helping them to hide". 
