12/08/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 12/08/11
One of the most sought after destinations on the Croatian coast is the Makarska Riviera in central Dalmatia, with its clean sea, sun-bathed beaches and a long-standing tourist tradition. Many tourists from Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) visit the area, either for a weekend or full vacation. 
An article published in the local newspaper Makarska Riviera, written by the newspaper's editor in July, drew negative attention locally and regionally. The article, titled Guests that are a Surplus by Ivo Corkovic, claims that "guests from BiH are not welcome as they do not spend enough money, pollute the sea and just occupy space on the beaches". 
At first the writer addresses the problems in Croatian tourism in general, then turns attention to guests from BiH. Corkovic refers to tourists from BiH as "an elementary disaster which, unfortunately, cannot be avoided or eliminated". 
The article drew negative public reaction on both sides of the border. 
Croatia's Ministry of Tourism reacted swiftly to Corkovic's article in a press release. "All guests are welcome to Croatia, regardless of their country of origin. There are no first class or second class guests," Minister of Tourism Damir Bajs said. The ministry's official data states that BiH tourists are the second in number after German tourists on the Makarska Riviera. 
Some BiH guests have complained that they are treated according to the amount of money they spend vacationing in Croatia. 
"I intend to spend my monthly salary in Makarska. I do not think I'm cheap, much less that I pollute the beach or the sea, but I am bitter to be treated as a less important tourist," Stjepan Knezovic from Busovaca says. 
Another BiH tourist, Amela Corbic from Sarajevo says, "My family has been coming for vacations in Croatia for years; it is a tradition [in our family]. But this year I will go to Turkey. I want to be respected for my money, of which one gets less and less in Croatia." 
Due to enormous media attention and public indignation over Corkovic's article, Croatian President Ivo Josipovic voiced his reaction calling for equal treatment of Croatia's tourists. 
"Every guest is welcome in Croatia, especially our friends from BiH. Most people do not welcome guests according to the thickness of their wallets. Therefore, welcome dear people from Bosnia and Herzegovina," Josipovic said. 
With Croatia's tourist season at its peak, the country is vying for every tourist and expectations run high from this season. 
"As a city [Makarska] and country heavily relaying on [income from] tourism, they should not allow an individual opinion of one journalist destroy their image, especially considering the [geographical] closeness of tourists from BiH to this area. The problem will have an economic reflection in Makarska this year, and years to come," Mirza Mehmedovic, BiH communications expert, told SETimes. 
BiH ambassador to Croatia Vladimir Raspudic said that Corkovic's article is offensive but pointed out that the position of one individual does not reflect the attitude of all. 
"There is no doubt that this article caused damage, but it expresses the position of one person. I expect that local Makarska residents will have a lot to say to the author of this really unacceptable text, which does not contribute to the development of good relations between BiH and the Republic of Croatia," Raspudic says. 
