17/06/2013
By Andy Dabilis for Southeast European Times in Athens -- 17/06/13
Greece's coalition government cannot agree on how to deal with the growth of the neo-Nazi Golden Dawn party and is divided over an anti-racism bill aimed at the extremists. 
Prime Minister and New Democracy Conservative leader Antonis Samaras withdrew his support for the new bill after saying the existing laws are sufficient, leaving his partners, the PASOK Socialists and a tiny Democratic Left (DIMAR), to forward it to the parliament. 
Samaras' party relies on PASOK and DIMAR for a majority in the 300-seat parliament, but his partners' hope to over-ride his opposition were dashed when the major opposition Coalition of the Radical Left party proposed a separate measure, as did the Independent Greeks. 
With four anti-racism bills on the table, analysts said the likelihood of any passing is remote unless the parties can come together. Golden Dawn has put together another bill it said is designed to penalise the critics of Greece. 
George Tzogopoulos, a research fellow at the Athens-based Hellenic Foundation for European and Foreign Policy, said the confusion is commonplace for Greece. 
"Once again the politicians lack appropriate ways on how to proceed," he told SETimes. "This kind of legal framework isn't the measure to go after Golden Dawn." 
The extremist party has risen during the economic crisis, pitting itself against politicians, capitalists, bankers and tides of illegal immigrants who see Greece as a place for asylum or a steppingstone to other EU countries. 
"Golden Dawn will disappear if Greece deals with the dimensions of the crisis. You have to look at the roots and causes of the problems," Tzogopoulos said. 
At the heart of the bill backed by PASOK and DIMAR are tougher penalties for racist assaults and criminalising denial of the Holocaust, a cornerstone of Golden Dawn's beliefs. The party also denies charges from critics that it has beaten immigrants, despite witness accounts. 
Antonis Klapsis, head of research for the Konstandinos Karamanlis Institute for Democracy in Athens, told SETimes that, "Even if the bill passes it won't change the situation a lot because laws aren't implemented." He said the existing laws against racism have been enforced only four times since they were implemented in 1979. 
"This might not be the right method to prosecute them [Golden Dawn], because they will appear as martyrs and every time they are pressed they get more support," Klapsis added. "Samaras is right. It's not a legal issue, it's a political and social issue." 
Samaras said one strategy might be just to wait and see if an economic recovery turns people away from the extremists, who rose from obscurity to win 18 seats in parliament last year, and have nearly doubled their support since to around 13 percent. 
"I believe that the moment unemployment starts falling, this whole concept of extremities will be reduced, if not diluted," Samaras said at an economic seminar in Finland. 
Evangelos Venizelos, PASKOK leader, said the bill targets Golden Dawn. 
"Greece has a political grouping that is unashamedly Nazi and organises acts violating the rule of law," Venizelos said. 
Cecilia Malmstrom, the European Commission's Home Affairs commissioner, visited Athens in May and said she was concerned about an increase in racially-motivated attacks and Golden Dawn's growth. 
Some 220 attacks were reported between October and December 2011. EU Human Rights Commissioner Nils Muiznieks said the violence amounted to an "early form of far-right terror" and called on Greek authorities to pass legislation that would curb the party's influence. 
Alex Sakellariou, a researcher and sociologist at Panteion University in Athens, said the government has been immobilised by indecision. 
"Samaras is afraid of both his own party members and voters, many of whom are feeling close to Golden Dawn," he told SETimes. 
"He's afraid of losing some voters and feels the pressure coming from abroad. That's why he suddenly stepped back after initiating the issue." 
Will the proposed legislation curb Golden Dawn's influence? Let us know what you think below. 
