10/06/2004
(EurActiv - 10/06/04; AFP, Kathimerini, MPA, The Guardian, EurActiv - 09/06/04; Reuters, Independent, EUobserver - 08/06/04)
Greece pledged on Wednesday (9 June) to implement anti-terrorism laws agreed on by all EU member states before the start of the Athens Olympics in August. The country was among several countries criticised at a meeting of EU justice and home affairs ministers on Tuesday for being too slow in adding the measures to domestic legislation.
Under a declaration adopted in the aftermath of the 11 March bombings in Madrid, the measures were to be put in place by all EU member states "no later than June 2004". But according to a report by the Union's counter-terrorism co-ordinator, Gijs de Vries, Greece has failed to implement five key steps.
"I had the opportunity to remark that Greece will fulfil all its legal and essential obligations deriving from EU-level decisions relative to combating terrorism," Greek Justice Minister Anastassios Papaligouras said Wednesday. He attributed the delay to the change of government in Greece.
"It was natural for the New Democracy government, which took over just three months ago, to wish to study the issue carefully. As justice minister, I had to find a balance between fighting terrorism and the absolute, undeviating respect for individual rights and the rule of law," Papaligouras said.
The measures Greece has yet to incorporate include the framework decision on an EU-wide arrest warrant, which will allow for a fast-track handover of suspects wanted for terrorism and other serious crimes. The other measures cover areas such as the creation of joint investigation teams, common definitions of terrorist crimes, combating money laundering and the introduction of so-called biometric identifiers -- fingerprints and iris scans -- on passports.
The justice ministry has indicated that it will draft legislation covering the measures and submit it to parliament for approval before the end of this month. Expectations are that the laws will be passed in August.
The criticism of Greece's performance in adopting the anti-terrorism laws came approximately two months before the Games open.
Reiterating that the country is prepared to counter potential terrorist attacks, Greek officials are stressing that "everything humanly possible" will be done to ensure the safety of the Games. The country has allocated 1 billion euros for security measures.
"We are obliged to work on the basis of the greatest possible threat," Public Order Minister George Voulgarakis said in Thessaloniki on Wednesday. "Let [the critics] show us one measure we have not taken, one strategy we have not followed. We are at ease with our conscience."
In other news, Norway's King Harald V and his wife Queen Sonja said Wednesday that they are certain the Games will be a success. The royal couple is visiting Greece at the invitation of President Costis Stephanopoulos. Also on Wednesday, Dutch Defence Minister Henk Kamp met with his Greek counterpart, Spilos Spiliotopoulos, in Athens. Kamp said he is impressed by Greece's security preparations.
