07/05/2007
By Marina Stojanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 07/05/07
Last month, the Macedonian Interior Ministry started issuing new biometric passports that make use of microchip technology. The passports have several types of security that make them difficult to counterfeit. Officials say introducing them fulfils one of the conditions for liberalising the country's visa regime with the EU. 
"Macedonia is one of the first non-EU countries to issue ID documents with such high-level security and quality," Interior Minister Gordana Jankulovska said. In addition to meeting EU standards, the new passports are fully compliant with guidelines of the International Civil Aviation Organisation, according to her ministry. 
Applicants will no longer be required to bring photographs when they apply for a passport. Instead, they will have their pictures taken at the point of issuance, where their fingerprints and electronic signatures will also be collected. 
The photo, fingerprint, signature and other personal information will be stored on the 72kb microchip contained in the passport. By law, citizens will receive their passports within 15 days of applying. 
The new passports are more expensive than the old ones. Adults over the age of 27 must now pay 33 euros, while those under 27 must pay 29 euros. The cost for children under four is 25 euros. All older passports must be replaced by 2012. 
To service Skopje citizens, the Interior Ministry has installed six base points in the Passport Division where the procedure can be completed. Outside the capital, 39 base points have been installed in 29 Interior Ministry offices. 
The passports -- which will be red instead of the old blue -- are not the only changes to documentation. Later this year, citizens will begin seeing new ID cards and drivers' licenses, all as part of a new production system. 
Germany's Giesecke & Devrient won the tender for project manager of the system -- a contract worth 23.5m euros. It provides for setting up two identical personalisation lines that can produce a total of 2,000 passports, 2,400 ID cards, and 600 drivers' licenses a day. 
"It makes both financial and functional sense to go with a combined personalisation system; the decision will pay for itself," said a representative of the German firm, Hans Wolfgang Kunz. 
