12/01/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 12/01/06
During their first meeting this year, UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen and Kosovo Parliament Speaker Nexhat Daci both came out strongly against any proposal that would entail the partition of Kosovo. 
"If entities in any way smell like partition, then that is not on the agenda. It is absolutely clear that partition of Kosovo is not on the agenda," Jessen-Petersen at a press conference following his talks with Daci on Thursday (12 January). Serbian negotiators have called for establishing a set of Serb municipalities that, together, would amount to a type of ethnic entity. 
UNMIK is in Kosovo to back the negotiations and status resolution process, which is in the interest of all citizens, Jessen-Petersen said. 
"I have made it clear from the beginning that I believe it is important that we now move on to the status, that the status issue be resolved. I am confident that it will be resolved in the course of this year. And I think this will be the best way to move forward on European issues." Stressing that the status talks are a top priority, he called on Pristina's negotiating team to meet on a regular basis and prepare itself for a very difficult process. 
For his part, Daci said he is confident that the team will meet more frequently. He said that there is information that the health of Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova -- who suffers from lung cancer -- is improving, but added that "other modalities" for functioning of the team will also be considered. 
Daci also told reporters he opposes any kind of division long ethnic lines. "I continue to make it clear that after independence, a substantial decentralisation for Kosovo citizens shall take place," Daci said. However, he added, "the responsibilities and obligations to the citizens lie with Kosovo institutions, and not with Belgrade." 
While formally part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been run as a de facto UN protectorate since 1999, when NATO action forced the regime of Slobodan Milosevic to withdraw from the province. Most of its predominantly Albanian population favours independence, while Serbia wants to retain sovereignty and is offering wide autonomy instead. 
