18/04/2007
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 18/04/07
Visiting Zagreb last week, EU Justice Commissioner Franco Frattini urged Croatia to continue with reforms, adding that the country needs to show concrete results."There is still work to be done. This is not something that you need to do because Brussels tells you to, but for the sake of the Croatian citizens," he told reporters Thursday (April 12th). 
During the two-day visit, the commissioner met with Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, the justice and internal affairs ministers, and parliamentary representatives. On Friday, Frattini served as chairman of a meeting of justice and interior ministers from countries participating in the Southeastern European Co-operation Process. 
Judicial reform is a key condition, Frattini told the Croatian officials, and the country must show its determination to tackle corruption and crime. 
"The fight against corruption and organised crime need to be a top priority of the government," he said. "I am satisfied because I have seen good and positive signs in Zagreb. The prime minister understands this important and difficult task that his government has." 
Drawing on his own experience with the issue, Frattini said an essential step is to cut off the financial sources. That, he said, is the only efficient way to halt the spread of organised crime and to prevent those engaged in it from achieving their goals. He also underlined the importance of regional co-operation, saying that Croatia has an important role to play in Southeast Europe. 
Nobody -- including politicians and judges -- can be above the law, the commissioner said. Successful reforms require a change in mentality, and that is no easy task, he added. Furthermore, even when measures ae adopted on paper, putting them into practice can still be a challenge. 
"Legislative reforms are not enough. They need to be fully implemented," Frattini said after his meeting with Sanader. 
For his part, the prime minister stressed that fighting corruption is a government priority. He agreed on the need to bring procedural closure to corruption cases, whether petty or high-level. 
Justice Minister Ana Lovrin, meanwhile, told Frattini that Croatia has already cut its backlog by 30%. The number of reported corruption cases in 2006 increased by 120%, she added. 
