08/11/2011
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 08/11/11
As elsewhere in Europe, the majority of Bulgarian women prefer to work as an employee of a private or public company, or a state institution, than to run their own business. As a result, nearly two-thirds of all owners of small- and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) are men. 
At 36% back in 2009, the share of women entrepreneurs in the Balkan nation was already above the current EU average of 30%, a recent report by the Bulgarian Small and Medium Enterprises Promotion Agency shows. The companies they ran were mainly in the service (49%) and trade (40%) sectors, with those working in the production and construction fields, accounting for 10% and 1%, respectively. 
The percentage of women entrepreneurs who have a university degree and speak at least one foreign language is significantly higher than that among men, the agency's study also noted. 
Some might have been forced to create their own companies either because they lost a job or lacked an alternative employment opportunity. 
But for others, like electrical engineer Lilly Aladjem and architect Boyka Vitanova, it was a matter of personal choice each of them made in the early 1990s at the height of an already successful professional career in the construction sector. 
Both were driven by similar motives when they opened their designers' bureaus in Sofia during the initial phase of Bulgaria's transition to market economy, despite all the difficulties the country was undergoing at the time. 
"I was confident of my professional skills and I wanted to show everyone that I can do it," Aladjem, who had two small kids when she decided to move to the private sector in 1993, told SETimes. 
"I had already won myself a good name in the profession, so that I've never had to beg for work. On the contrary, work always found me," she noted. 
Sitting at the opposite side of the table, Vitanova echoed Aladjem's words, saying she, too, wanted "to prove to everyone that she had the capacity to make it on her own" when she set up her architectural bureau in 1991. 
"Those were very tough times," she noted, adding that she used every interval between two projects to polish her professional and managerial skills. 
Aside from being a top professional, a woman must be ambitious, flexible and must have excellent organisational abilities for her business to be successful, Vitanova and Aladjem said. 
Reny Petrova, owner of a Sofia-based company providing consulting and assistance services in the field of human resources, adds "creativity" and "charm" to the recipe. 
She set up her own business six years ago, because she "wanted to take her life in her own hands, irrespective of the difficulties this might involve", she told SETimes. 
"Today, women are treated as equal partners in business by men," Petrova said, echoing Aladjem and Vitanova's words. "I have never been treated with prejudice," she stressed. 
All three women are now concerned about the possible impact of the global downturn on their businesses. 
A problem both Aladjem and Vitanova face is clients not paying on time for their services in recent months. The situation is still manageable, both said, hoping this would not turn into a bigger issue for them. 
Petrova said her company's activities and revenues have shrunk by up to 40% as a result of the growing market stagnation in the past three years. 
"Until the middle of 2008, there was a shortage of workers and specialists in all fields. The situation has changed dramatically since the crisis began in late 2008. Today, there are many people looking for a job and very few vacancies," she said. 
