04/08/2006
(Blic - 04/08/06; AP, Reuters, UPI, Radio B92, Beta - 03/08/06)
The Belgrade District Court announced on Thursday (3 August) the inclusion of a former top Serbian police general in the investigation of the 1999 killings of three US citizens of Kosovo Albanian origin. 
"The investigative judge ... has decided to extend the investigation to Vlastimir Djordjevic for the criminal act of a war crime against prisoners of war," Reuters quoted the court as saying in a statement. 
The investigation into the killings of brothers Illy, Mehmet and Agron Bytyqi, shot dead in July 1999, was launched on 1 March, when two people were arrested for suspected involvement in the case. 
The three brothers, whose bodies were found in a mass grave in eastern Serbia in 2001, joined 400 fellow Albanians living in the United States in the so-called Atlantic Brigade that fought alongside the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) during the Slobodan Milosevic regime's 1998-1999 crackdown on the province. 
Citing a report in the Belgrade-based daily Blic on Thursday, Serbia's Radio B92 said that Djordjevic, who was deputy interior minister and head of the Public Security Department until January 2001, was charged with giving the order to murder the Bytyqi brothers. 
They had been arrested on Serbian-controlled territory in June 1999 and sentenced to 17 days of imprisonment. On 8 July 1999, nearly a month after the end of the conflict, Djordjevic reportedly ordered Sreten Popovic, a subordinate officer at the training centre in Petrovo Selo, to take the Bytyqi brothers to that facility following their release from the Prokuplje prison. In a telephone conversation a day later, the former general reportedly ordered Popovic to hand over the brothers to unidentified interior ministry staff, who later killed them at a nearby garbage disposal site. 
It was likely, according to B92, that Popovic and interior ministry members Milos Stojanovic and Aleksandar Nikolic, who were earlier under investigation for the case, have directly implicated Djordjevic. 
He was indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in October 2003 for his alleged involvement in war crimes committed during the 1998-1999 conflict in Kosovo. 
An August 2002 media report suggested that, during a March 1999 meeting in Milosevic's office, Djordjevic had initiated the cover-up of civilian victims of the Kosovo conflict. He disappeared shortly after mass graves containing the remains of more than 800 Kosovo Albanians were discovered in Serbia in 2001. 
In June this year, Djordjevic, who is widely believed to be hiding in Russia, was removed from his joint ICTY indictment with three other former generals -- Nebojsa Pavkovic, Vladimir Lazarevic and Sreten Lukic -- so that the trial against them could begin as scheduled. 
Bruno Vekaric, a spokesman at the Belgrade District Court, said on Thursday that authorities likely would seek Djordjevic's extradition from Russia. 
In other news, the court announced also Thursday the launch of criminal proceedings against two unidentified former KLA members over their alleged involvement in war crimes committed in June 1999. The two are believed to be responsible for the killing of at least one ethnic Serb from the town of Orahovac, for looting dozens of Serb homes, and for stealing cash and jewelry. According to Vekaric, one of the suspects was apprehended recently during a visit to central Serbia. 
