26/08/2009
(Zaman - 25/08/09; World Bulletin, The Jamestown Foundation, Hurriyet, Journal of Turkish Weekly, Bianet - 24/08/09; Zaman - 22/08/09; Reuters - 20/08/09)
Turkey's military backs efforts to resolve the country's Kurdish issues but opposes dialogue with the outlawed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), the head of the army general staff said on Tuesday (August 25th). 
"It is important the state takes the necessary measures in the economic, socio-cultural and international fields," General Ilker Basburg said in an official statement published on the general staff's website. He stressed, however, that the military "will not take part in any activities which may result in contact with the terrorist organisation or its supporters." 
He also said no measures should be taken that would undermine the unity of Turkey. Under the constitution, he said, Turkey is a "single, undivided state" and its language is Turkish. 
Freedom of debate should not include subjects "which would endanger the existence of the state or open the way for the polarisation and division of the country," the general insisted. 
The statement came as the Turkish government seeks to build momentum for sweeping reforms aimed at ending the decades-old PKK insurgency. The separatist group, considered a terrorist organisation by the EU and the United States, as well as Ankara, has waged a campaign of violence since 1984, with more than 40,000 killed in the process. 
 Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his ruling Justice and Development Party hope to diminish the PKK's appeal by boosting rights and opportunities for Turkey's Kurds. While no concrete details of the government's plan have been released, it reportedly would ease restrictions on use of the Kurdish language and amend counterterrorism laws, which have been used in the past to arrest children for throwing stones at police. 
According to the daily Zaman, the Erdogan administration is seeking a way to address Kurdish concerns within the unitary structure of the state. So far, however, it appears caught between Turkish nationalists, who say the proposed reforms are a concession to terrorists, and Kurdish advocates, who term them inadequate. 
On Monday, the head of the opposition Republican People's Party lashed out at the government's plan, saying it would set the stage for dividing Turkey along ethnic lines. "Even the opinions set forth as part of this process have affected Turkey in a negative way," Deniz Baykal said. 
The right-wing Nationalist Movement Party went even further, accusing the government of "treason". 
"It is clear as daylight that the prime minister's project… is aimed at fulfilling, step by step, the demands of ethnic separatists," he said last week, charging the United States and Iraqi Kurds were behind the plan. 
The pro-Kurdish Democratic Society Party, meanwhile, accused the government of lacking the political will for reforms. "Instead of defending the democratic rights of Kurds ,which have been denied for 80 years, the government is taking a fearful and cowardly approach ... colluding with the unjust position of the opposition," the DTP said in a statement. 
The party, which faces possible closure because of alleged ties to the PKK, has been pushing for autonomy in the mainly Kurdish-populated southeast, as well as an amnesty for PKK members -- demands which the government says are beyond the pale. 
