28/09/2009
(AP, EurActiv, B92 - 25/09/09; Reuters - 24/09/09; AFP - 23/09/09; Fena -- 24/09/09 - 27/09/09; Office of the High Representative -- 18/09/09 - 25/09/09)
Bosnian Serb leaders are challenging the Dayton Peace Agreement (DPA) by rejecting the top international envoy's orders, the international body overseeing the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) said on Friday (September 25th). 
The ambassadors of the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council (PIC) warned that "the ensuing downward spiral in political relations and challenges" to the DPA "would only damage" the interests of the RS and BiH citizens. 
Actions of this kind would also undermine BiH's "credibility as a potential future member of the EU and NATO," the diplomats stressed in a statement issued after their meeting in Sarajevo. 
RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik's cabinet decided on Thursday that it would not implement High Representative Valentin Inzko's decisions of September 18th, aimed at ensuring the continued operations of the state-controlled electricity company, Elektroprenos. 
The cabinet also asked the RS representatives on the power utility's bodies, particularly the members of its board of directors, to boycott the company's work until shareholders agree on how to resolve its problems. 
"The RS government's conclusions are a clear attempt to weaken an important state-level company, established in accordance with the constitution of BiH," the PIC Steering Board said. "It is also a significant setback in fulfilling necessary EU-related priorities." 
The ambassadors urged Dodik's cabinet and especially the RS parliament to reconsider this course at its special session on Wednesday, when lawmakers are scheduled to discuss Inzko's decisions of September 18th. 
Elektroprenos was established as part of a 2006 agreement, under which the three existing Serb, Croat and Bosniak-run operators were merged into a joint state power transmission company. The move was designed to allow BiH to join the Southeast European single energy community. RS holds a 41% stake in the company and the Federation of BiH (FBiH) holds the remaining 59%. 
The high representative issued the decisions on Elektroprenos a day before the term of the company's general director was due to end. 
The mandate of four members of the management board expired more than a year ago, but the managing bodies of Elektroprenos have made no attempts thus far to initiate the appointment procedures for any of those positions, Inzko noted. He said the situation at the firm has "seriously deteriorated as a result of the continued boycott by the RS authorities". 
Urging the RS government to "promptly and constructively re-engage in the company and contribute to its smooth functioning", the Austrian diplomat ordered members of the power utility's management board to appoint a new general director without delay. 
The PIC Steering Board said the RS government's move to order the entity's Official Gazette not to publish Inzko's decision of September 18th also constituted "a direct challenge" to the DPA. 
A year ago, the RS authorities threatened to pull out of the power company and establish their own operator instead. 
In addition to Inzko's decisions, Deputy High Representative and Brcko Supervisor Raffi Gregorian issued an order on September 19th that would prevent either of BiH's two entities from acquiring Electroprenos property in the Brcko district, if the company is dissolved. 
The RS government rejected Gregorian's order as well, describing it as unacceptable and potentially harmful, financially. 
On September 18th, Inzko also issued a set of other decisions that would pave the way for the final closure of the special Brcko supervision by the end of this year, which is one of the key prerequisites for the eventual closure of the Office of the High Representative.
