24/11/2012
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 24/11/12
Millions of euros are spent on public relations and marketing in Kosovo -- particularly by political parties -- and experts and citizens question the effectiveness and transparency of these high-cost efforts. 
According to Kosova Democratic Institute, which works to enhance transparency and accountability in the political process, parties spent more than 3 million euros during the 2010 general election. Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party spent 1.04 million euros, while the Kosovo Democratic League spent 608,000 euros and the Alliance for the New Kosova spent 553,000 euros. 
The Democratic Party surpassed the legal limit for campaign spending, but the only penalty requires parties to return any funds that went beyond the limit. Parties must file reports on campaign spending with the Central Election Commission, but Marita Mustafa, a programme director with institute, said those reports don't do enough to provide transparency. 
"Despite the enormous sums of money spent for the campaigns, they still do not manage to prove the origin of their funds and the ways these funds have been used," Mustafa told SETimes. 
Fehmi Ajvazi, spokesperson for Kosovo Central Election Commission, told SETimes that electoral laws allow political parties to spend 50 cents per voter registered in the 2010 campaign. By contrast, during the 2007 parliamentary election, when parties were permitted to spend the same amount, the Democratic Party spent 657,000 euros. Alliance for the New Kosovo spent 270,000 euros more in 2010 than it did in 2007. 
The increase in political spending comes during the global financial crisis, which is a source of frustration to citizens. Kosovo daily Koha Ditore reported this week that the taxpayer-funded budget for parliamentary parties in 2013 will be 4.2 million euros, an increase of 1.8 million euros from 2012. 
"The parties always spend a lot, they have donors, there are people, businessmen, who are connected to them and feed them," said Pristina resident Arta Begu. "Political parties do not feel the crisis, people do." 
Issues of transparency in marketing aren't limited to politics. 
Fisnik Ismali, co-founder and creative director of Ogilvy, one of the largest public relations and marketing firms in Kosovo, said there is little transparency in either public or private sector campaigns. 
Ismali said agencies can make 500,000 euros while working on three or four long-term contracts, and they strive to be cost-effective. 
"The companies have a tendency to spend less money and make more from the advertising, because they are private companies and want to benefit as much as possible, spending as little as possible," Ismaili told SETimes. 
Podujeva resident Butrint Idrizi said advertising has an impact, especially when it comes to products, but added that political party advertising can have a counter-effect. 
"It happened to me some years ago not to vote for the party I sympathised with in the last moment because I saw some poor presentation of its members during the campaign," Idrizi told SETimes. 
