18/11/2010
By Ljiljana Smiljanic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 18/11/10
The EU's latest progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), released last week, suggests squabbling officials have become very good at blocking advancement in virtually every area. 
"The lack of joint vision among political leaders in BiH about the direction of the country keeps blocking essential reforms and further progress towards the EU," Dimitris Courculas, the head of enlargement and communication department in the EU General Enlargement Directory, told a press conference in Sarajevo. 
 He opted not to call the report negative however, as "it would mean this country has no perspective." 
Nevertheless, it amounts to a warning for political leaders. The most important EU demand has not been met: implementing necessary constitutional changes in order to facilitate the Human Rights Court verdict delivered in Strasbourg in December 2009. 
The case involves Dervo Sejdic, a Roma, and Jakob Finci, a Jew, who sued BiH for violating their human rights because according to the constitution, Roma and Jews are minorities and cannot be candidates for the tripartite presidency. 
Nearly a year has passed since that verdict, and despite some attempts at constitutional reform, it hasn't happened. 
 "It is necessary to take initial steps in order to make the Bosnian Constitution in accordance with the European Convention on Human Rights and in order to improve institutions' efficiency. It is necessary for BiH to be able to vote and implement EU laws and regulations towards the strategic goal of European integration," said Courculas. 
 He notes that while the region is moving towards the EU, BiH continues to lag behind. In general, between September 2009 and September 2010, the period covered in the progress report, obligations were either partially met or not met at all. 
The bright spot is visa liberalisation, which BiH was granted earlier this month after meeting all conditions, along with Albania. This demonstrates progress in the area of security issues, Courculas notes. 
There was also progress in terms of regional co-operation, refugee returns and the economy. BiH took some small steps as well towards fulfilling conditions for the eventual closure of the Office of the High Representative and its transition to the Office of the EU special representative. There was some progress, but not enough. The biggest problem remains corruption, which transcends every aspect of life in BiH. 
The watchdog group Transparency International in BiH says it has warned of the same issues. 
 "Unfortunately, reports on progress emphasise the same problems year after year, while Bosnian authorities show a lack of readiness [to resolve them]. Visa liberalisation is only one step towards EU membership, and as long as more decisive steps are not taken in fighting corruption, BiH cannot expect a positive progress report," the group said in a statement. 
Other NGOs, like the Alumni Association of the Centre for Interdisciplinary Postgraduate Studies (ACIPS), say that the EU progress report means political leaders are not doing their jobs. 
They believe citizens should not be held hostage by politicians any longer, and that the new government, formed after general elections on October 3rd, should focus on moving the country closer and faster towards the EU. 
Another criticism in the EU progress report is the fact that lawmakers have yet to pass a census law, despite 18 months of haggling in the state parliament. The EU also points out that political pressure on courts continues, and implementing the strategy on judicial reform has been spotty. The report also notes that the fiscal situation, especially in the Federation of BiH, remains problematic. 
