27/07/2006
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 27/07/06
Three municipalities -- Kavadarci, Veles, and Centar -- won the Macedonian Municipal Awards 2006 competition, organised by the European Agency for Reconstruction (EAR) and Macedonia's Secretariat for European Affairs. The awards feature a total of 500,000 euros in EU-provided funds, to be spent exclusively on infrastructure projects. 
The first place winner, Kavadarci, will receive 250,000 euros for an initiative to promote vineyard planting, wine production and wine tourism. It aims to boost local economic growth by increasing the amount of agricultural land that can be used for vineyards, introducing better quality grapes, and encouraging entrepreneurial development and job creation. 
As part of the project, the municipalities of Kavadarci, Rosoman and Demir Kapija set up a Local Sustainable Development Agency that provides loans to small and medium-sized enterprises in the wine industry. 
 According to an EAR press release, the project was chosen "for its innovative approach to the restructuring of the local economy". It is bringing "visible social and economic benefits for the communities," the release said. 
 The municipality of Veles won the second place prize of 150,000 euros for its project, "Veles -- Town of Culture". Some 255 cultural events have been organised as part of the project, including three international festivals, handicraft exhibitions, and the inauguration of a new church choir. 
 The third-place winner, Centar municipality, won 100,000 euros for the reconstruction of Makedonija Street in downtown Skopje. The street has now become one of the most visited sites among young people. The selection panel cited the quality of the application, its innovative approach in transferring the experience of other European cities, and its impact on the local economic environment. 
The contest, which wrapped up on 17 July, was open to all 84 municipalities, as well as the city of Skopje. A total of 58 municipalities participated with 53 projects they had designed themselves or in co-operation with one another. The applications were evaluated simultaneously by a fixed set of criteria in accordance with EAR rules. After all nominations were evaluated, the top six were short listed. A final selection was made after on-site visits to the municipalities. 
 Speaking at the awards ceremony, Erwan Fouere, EU special representative and head of the European Commission delegation in Skopje, said he hoped the awards -- meant to highlight the importance of the decentralisation process -- would become an annual event and thus further encourage municipalities in the years ahead. 
Decentralisation has been successful so far, Fouere said. But for further progress, he cautioned, "it will be necessary for the new government to devote the necessary effort and resources to make it fully operational". 
