25/07/2006
By Blerta Foniqi for Southeast European Times in Vienna – 25/07/06
The political phase of the Kosovo status negotiations began on Monday (24 July), as Serbian and Kosovo Albanian leaders held their first direct meeting. It was the first time since the 1999 NATO intervention that leaders from both sides have met to discuss Kosovo's future. 
The tense, one-day session in Vienna pitted the Kosovo Albanian majority's demands for full independence against Serbia's opposition to it. The four top leaders -- Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, Kosovo Prime Minister Agim Ceku, Serbian President Boris Tadic and Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica -- each delivered speeches reiterating their sides' entrenched positions. 
The delegations entered from opposite sides of the room, and there were no handshakes. 
"It is evident that the positions of the parties remain far apart: Belgrade would agree to almost anything but independence, whereas Pristina would accept nothing but full independence," UN envoy for the status talks Martti Ahtisaari told reporters. 
 Still technically part of Serbia, Kosovo has been governed by a UN mission since 1999. Its Kosovo Albanian majority strongly favours splitting from Serbia, while Belgrade wants to retain some form of sovereignty over the province. 
Eight rounds of technical talks have been held between delegations representing both sides, with little sign of a breakthrough. 
"Kosovo's independence is the alpha and omega, the start and finish of our stance," Sejdiu said in his speech at Monday's meeting. "We are interested in building an independent, sovereign and democratic Kosovo for all citizens." 
He also assured Kosovo Serbs that they would be fairly represented, and urged them to end their boycott of Kosovo institutions. The boycott, he said, reflected pressure from Belgrade rather than the stance of Kosovo Serbs. 
"Serbs are welcome in our institutions and will be welcomed always," Sejdiu added. 
Tadic, meanwhile, called for a compromise solution. Only such a solution "would have a real and sustainable meaning and be able to receive Serb support," he said. He also said agreement must be reached on decentralisation and the protection of religious and cultural heritage, terming this a "moral and political matter of the utmost importance". 
 Kostunica said Serbia could not accept the loss of 15 per cent of its territory, but would accept giving Kosovo "substantial autonomy". Under that proposal, Belgrade would retain control over foreign policy, border control and other key areas, while granting Kosovo authority over most day-to-day matters. 
 "The idea of creating a new state on Serbia's territory is dangerous," Kostunica said. 
Ceku, however, ruled out anything but independence, saying the matter was non-negotiable. "We are confident that Kosovo is a state; democratic state, sustainable and functional. We came in a meeting to get an international support for our state," said Ceku, a former commander of the Kosovo Liberation Army. 
