26/01/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Strasbourg -- 26/01/11
Kosovo's interim head of state, Jakup Krasniqi, says his country is ready to work with EULEX in launching an investigation into claims that organs were taken from prisoners held in Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA) detention camps. 
The allegations, contained in a report by Council of Europe (CoE) rapporteur Dick Marty, were the subject of a resolution adopted on Tuesday (January 25th) by the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE). 
 "We are interested in shedding light on this issue in order to know the truth, or in order that this unjust burden that has been loaded on Kosovo, and especially on the KLA, be once and forever taken off the agenda," Krasniqi said. 
Marty's report, released in December, dropped a political bombshell in the region by alleging that current Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci -- a former KLA commander -- may have headed a mafia-like network that smuggled weapons, drugs and human organs during and after the Kosovo conflict. 
On Tuesday, by a vote of 169-8 with 14 abstentions, PACE endorsed Marty's findings. It said there were "numerous indications" that organs were removed from some prisoners at a clinic located on Albanian territory in order to be trafficked abroad, and that Serb and Albanian prisoners received inhuman and degrading treatment at secret detention camps before ultimately disappearing. 
The resolution urged that EULEX be given a clear mandate, the resources and high-level political support it needed to carry out its "extraordinarily complex and important role" in investigating the charges. 
"In the interests of persons implicated and countries concerned, the allegations should be thoroughly investigated and the truth must be revealed," Darja Lavtizar-Bebler of Slovenia said. She also warned against politicising the issue and said it should not be allowed to derail dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina. 
"Our focus should be the victims, in Kosovo and the Western Balkans. We can't expect reconciliation without justice," Holger Heibach of Germany said. 
Some PACE deputies opposed or expressed concerns about the draft resolution. Turkey's Ozlem Turkone said it "has been written in the manner of a prosecutorial indictment". 
 "The introductory paragraphs of the resolution include personal accusations that are stated as though they were final judgments," he said. 
France's Jean-Claude Frécon, meanwhile, warned that "if these conclusions were adopted and subsequently found to be without substance, it would seriously weaken the credibility of the Parliamentary Assembly." 
Albanian representative Ilir Rusmaili also urged caution. "Whatever the allegations are, they should not be used to draw hasty or ill-founded conclusions. They should not give way to collective condemnation of specific groups or political forces, or even of nations," he said. 
Thaci and other Kosovo leaders have rejected the allegations contained in the Marty report, describing them as "slander" and "racist". On Tuesday, hundreds of Albanians staged a protest outside the PACE building in Strasbourg. 
