13/09/2006
(Reuters, DPA, UN News Centre, AFP, AKI, Serbianna, B92, Beta - 12/09/06; Reuters, VOA - 11/09/06)
Expressing disappointment over the lack of a breakthrough during nearly seven months of talks regarding the future of Kosovo, Secretary-General Kofi Annan has called for "more flexibility" from both the Serbian and Kosovo delegations, saying they need to demonstrate a spirit of compromise. 
The discussions so far -- including the first high-level meeting between both sides in July, along with other talks covering boundaries and cultural sites -- showed that the parties remain far apart on most issues, Annan said in a report to the Security Council, released on Tuesday (12 September). 
"I am disappointed … that little common ground has been identified between the positions of the Serbian and Kosovo delegations, which remain committed to 'substantial autonomy' and 'full independence' respectively, with minimal space for negotiation," he said. 
Pointing to the ongoing Kosovo Serb boycott of local institutions, Annan called for Belgrade to "remove all impediments" to their participation. At the same time, he urged Kosovo's leaders to make a greater effort to reach out to Serbs and other minorities. 
"Now is the time to reassure all communities that they have a place in Kosovo in the future regardless of its status," he said. 
The UN-sponsored talks, mediated by Annan's special envoy for the status process, former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari, opened in Vienna on 20 February. The international community wants to see the negotiations completed this year, and many expect the Security Council to intervene by the end of this December, if the Serbs and Kosovo Albanians fail to agree on a solution. 
UNMIK head Joachim Ruecker told Reuters on Monday that he believes Ahtisaari will submit a proposal for a solution to the Council within the next three months. 
"If we continue to assume, and I think it's a good assumption, that Ahtisaari will be able to meet the timelines as intended, then I wouldn't even exclude that we have a Security Council resolution by the end of the year," the UNMIK chief said. 
At the same time, however, Russian President Vladimir Putin has suggested that his country could veto any solution that goes against Moscow's interests. Russia is one of the five permanent members of the 15-nation Security Council, giving it the power to reject any decisions. 
Putin has voiced concern that granting independence to Kosovo could serve as a precedent for other provinces, such as Georgia's Abkhazia and South Ossetia, to seek secession. 
Citing Western diplomats, Reuters reported that the eventual solution could be some form of independence, under long-term EU and NATO supervision. 
