26/04/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 26/04/05
The EU ministerial council has formally approved a positive feasibility study for Serbia-Montenegro, which the European Commission (EC) adopted earlier this month. During its meeting in Luxembourg on Monday (25 April), the council acknowledged "considerable progress by Serbia-Montenegro", and confirmed that the EU wants to begin talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the country as soon as possible. The council also stressed the Union's desire for the consolidation of the common state of Serbia-Montenegro. 
 The approval followed confirmation that General Nebojsa Pavkovic -- wanted by the UN war crimes tribunal on war crimes charges stemming from the 1998-1999 conflict -- has arrived in The Hague. His transfer fulfilled the final remaining condition for endorsement of the feasibility study. 
The ministers emphasised that, as in the case of the other countries of the Western Balkans, "The speed of Serbia-Montenegro's EU accession will depend on the speed with which the common state and its two members are able to complete the necessary reforms and adjust to the Copenhagen Declaration. Other requirements are meeting the conditions stated in the stabilisation and association process, including full co-operation with The Hague tribunal." 
EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said Monday the council and the EC aim to begin SAA negotiations with Belgrade by 5 October -- the fifth anniversary of the democratic changes in Serbia. He added that the EU is encouraging direct dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina to resolve the Kosovo issue. 
EU security chief Javier Solana said Monday that Pavkovic's transfer to The Hague confirms Belgrade's changed attitude towards co-operation with the tribunal. The general, he said, was the last in a series of indictees that Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica had pledged to deliver to The Hague. 
Pavkovic, former chief of staff of the Yugoslav Army, has been charged together with generals Vladimir Lazarevic, Sreten Lukic and Vlastimir Djordjevic. The four are accused of crimes against Kosovo Albanians in the first half of 1999. He is the 14th indictee to arrive at The Hague from Belgrade in the last six months. 
According to Radio B92, the list of fugitive suspects from Serbia and Republika Srpska now stands at nine. The remaining wanted individuals are Djordjevic, Goran Hadzic, Milan Lukic, Sredoje Lukic, Zdravko Tolimir, Dragan Zelenovic, Stojan Zupljanin and top war crimes indictees Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic. 
Welcoming the council's decision, Kostunica said it demonstrates that Serbia is capable of "taking its share of responsibility and making its contribution so that the entire region becomes an integral part of the EU". 
"Our country is once again becoming a trustworthy and important partner in building peace, democracy and sustainable growth in the region. We have actually only taken the place that naturally belongs to us in the overall development of this part of Europe," he said. 
