25/10/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 25/10/04
Southeast European Times: How would you evaluate the preparations for the 2005 parliamentary elections? What kinds of difficulties are you facing? 
Ilirian Celibashi: February 2005 is a little late to undertake preparations for holding the parliamentary elections. Although this date is connected with the time required to implement amendments to the Election Code, the CEC has decided to begin its work earlier and initiate organisational measures that are connected with the election process. 
SETimes: The accuracy of voter's lists was an issue contested during the last elections. What has the CEC done to ensure the lists are correct? 
Celibashi: The amendments connected with the voter’s lists have been at the centre of the parliamentary bipartisan commission's work on election improvements. The activity of this commission was halted for a long time, until the political parties reached agreement on the CEC's composition. Possible improvements to the voter's lists were dependent on arriving at a consensus on the CEC issue. 
That consensus -- finalised by parliament's vote on 21 October -- has paved the way for completing the preparation of voter's lists for the 2005 parliamentary elections. The CEC understands the need to create the proper conditions for the preparation of accurate and uncontested voter’s lists, bearing in mind technical problems that arose during the local elections in 2003. Election experts have introduced several proposals regarding the procedures to be followed for the preparation of a preliminary and definitive voter’s list. One positive step taken so far has been the initiative taken by the CEC and the ministry of local governance and decentralisation to remove duplicate names from the civil registers. 
SETimes: While the majority and opposition have been fighting over different issues, including the balance of the CEC, the international community has been calling for free and accepted elections. Will that happen in 2005? 
Celibashi: The implementation of the changes in the Election Code this year are necessary, as they will pave the way for the concrete preparations for the 2005 vote. If all the political and institutional factors work together and co-ordinate their efforts, then the envisaged standards will become a reality. 
SETimes: Apart from implementing the international community's recommendations, what else must the CEC do to ensure fair and accepted elections? 
Celibashi: The CEC has to respect the law, the Election Code of the Republic of Albania. It also has to fulfil the OSCE/ODIHR recommendations that followed the 2003 local vote. We have to keep in mind the fact that these recommendations were addressed to the Albanian political parties, in the expectation that they will join forces to make the necessary improvements to the election code. 
SETimes: Has the CEC requested the presence of international observers? If so, how many? 
Celibashi: The CEC always has appreciated the presence of observers, whether foreign or local. The mission of the OSCE/ODIHR is to maintain excellent relations between the observers and the CEC. The CEC expects that the international observers will determine whether we have reached the standards set by the OSCE and the Council of Europe (CoE). As the date of the elections approaches, the CEC will request the presence of international observers. The number will be decided by the relevant institutions such as OSCE/ODIHR and the CoE. 
SETimes: What is being done to train local commissioners and to prepare the election infrastructure? 
Celibashi: The CEC has prepared a training programme for the local commissions. It is a detailed programme, covering organisation, logistical infrastructure and financial cost. The training programme will be implemented at two levels: training of the commissions in the election zones, and training of the commissions at the voting centres. The CEC will recruit nearly 200 trainers to implement the project. The CEC also intends to establish an information system for the election commissioners, advising them of the time and place of the training sessions. The training programme will take place with the close technical and financial co-operation of the IFES office in Albania. 
SETimes: Given all the challenges, is Albania capable of holding accepted and free elections? 
Celibashi: Albania will hold fair elections accepted by all, if the professionalism of the CEC is followed, and if the political parties respect the law and their obligations 
