11/12/2006
(Businesswire, Los Angeles Times - 11/12/06; The New York Times, UPI - 10/12/06; ANA-MPA, Kathimerini - 05/12/06; Reuters, DPA - 21/11/06)
The J. Paul Getty Museum said on Monday (December 11th) it would return to Greece two ancient artefacts, believed to have been smuggled out of the country in the early 1990s. 
"We are pleased to announce today we have reached an agreement in principle on the return of two objects -- a Gold Funerary Wreath and a Statue of a Kore -- that have been claimed by the Hellenic Republic Ministry of Culture," said a statement, signed by Greek Culture Minister Georgios Voulgarakis and Dr. Michael Brand, the Getty Museum director. 
"A formal agreement, which will be signed soon, will include details about the return of the objects to Greece, as well as plans for future collaboration between the Hellenic Republic Ministry of Culture and the J. Paul Getty Museum," it said. 
The US museum obtained the two rare objects -- both dating back to the 4th century BCE -- in 1993. It reportedly paid $4.45m for them. Monday's announcement followed nearly a year of talks between Greek officials and the US museum. It has been a decade since Athens first claimed that the pieces originated in Greece. 
Citing Greek police sources, The New York Times reported on Sunday that the funerary wreath, decorated with solid gold leaves and twigs, was dug up by a farmer in 1990 near Serres, in northern Greece. 
It then reached the art market through Germany and Switzerland, where the Getty's former antiquities curator, Marion True, reportedly first saw it in 1992. Eventually, the Getty bought the rare antiquity for $1.15m. 
On November 21st, an Athens prosecutor charged True and several others over their alleged involvement in the deal. The curator resigned last year after Italian authorities pressed charges against her, accusing her of conspiring to obtain stolen antiquities. 
 In July, the Getty Museum returned two other antiquities to Greece -- a 4th century engraved tombstone from the ancient city of Thebes, also purchased in 1993, and a 6th century BCE marble relief, bought by J. Paul Getty himself in 1955. 
In September, Germany's University of Heidelberg returned an important small marble fragment from the Parthenon. It likely would be put on display at the new Acropolis museum, which is expected to open next year. 
The Greek authorities hope other national treasures and antiquities would be repatriated, particularly the Elgin Marbles kept at the British Museum, which include much of the Parthenon frieze. 
About a week ago, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution tabled by Greece on the return or restitution of cultural property to countries of origin. 
 "The adoption of this resolution in itself signals and guides the countries to help so that the antiquities from all over the world will return to their homes," Voulgarakis said in a speech at the UN on December 4th, welcoming the General Assembly's move. "The illegal trade of antiquities is in the same category as the illegal trade of weapons, narcotics and people. It amounts to a form of organised crime that is directly related to mobsters and money laundering." 
