10/11/2011
By Bedrana Kaletovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 10/11/11
Two weeks after the terrorist attack on the US embassy in Sarajevo, key officials of BiH's Islamic Community (IC) continue to fiercely criticise the act and express hope that law enforcement will soon discover the motives and circumstances behind the attack. 
"Terror, fear and hate must not have religious motivation or identification, and if such things happen, they represent brutal and unacceptable abuse of religion. A crime in the name of religion is a crime against religion," the IC said in a statement. 
Given that the IC continuously tackles the questions of incorrect interpretation of faith, violence and hate, many ask just how such an act could have occurred in a country where religious communities preach co-existence. 
Although the IC had condemned false interpretations of Islam as early as December 1993, extremist interpretations of Islam remain a regional problem. 
"A country that does not adequately punish violators of any law, and does not follow verbal condemnations with imposition of adequate sanctions, sends a message of implicit support. While this is the case, it is not impossible to expect more terrorist acts, and this is disastrous for BiH, which even without the Wahhabis has plenty of other problems," Zenica resident Ramiz Salchin told SETimes. 
"I am faithful and proud of it, but killing innocent people can not have any connection with faith because that is a crime against the faith," Sarajevo resident Osman Zahirovic told SETimes. 
Officials say any radical attempt to uproot the Wahhabi view of Islam would bring more damage than good; the solution consists of monitoring and prevention. 
The decision of IC head Reisu-l-ulema Mustafa Ceric to send a message to all imams and religious officials in BiH and abroad condemning violence and hate in the name of the faith, is just such a preventative measure. 
Ceric's message was read at the Friday prayer last week, a day before the four-day Muslim holiday of Eid al-Adha. 
"The fact that terrorists and criminals hide behind religion and religious slogans makes their sin even greater and more dangerous, because they attempt to justify their insane misdoings. We know that among Bosniaks at home and in the diaspora there exist violent radical and extremist individuals and groups, named by one name or another," the message said. 
"They spread hate and mistrust towards those who think otherwise, all supposedly in the name of Islam, discrediting the faith and its teachings in eyes of a greatest number of people," the message continued in part. 
Tuzla mufti representative Vahind Efendi Falovic sent a similar message. "People who commit such disgusting acts and mock the honorable Islamic teachings are perverting the faith," Falovic said. 
Senad Agic, head imam of the Islamic Association of Bosniaks of North America, also sent a message against terrorism and urging the faithful to adhere to the proper faith. 
"Our community knows that there is no place in Islam for such a serious deviation, but we will continue to talk about it as long as there are those who use Islam as an excuse when turning to terrorism. We do this because of our friends and neighbors, the Americans, who have still not had the opportunity to acquaint themselves better with Muslims," Agic said. 
