09/05/2011
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 09/05/11
Reports of human rights problems continue surface in Southeast Europe despite constitutional and legal guarantees, according to the latest US State Department assessment. And one country in the region, Turkey, has drawn serious criticism from rights advocates, it noted. 
 Released last month, the 2010 report on global Human Rights Practices documents a wide range of problems, including overcrowded prisons, corruption, discrimination against members of vulnerable groups, mistreatment by police and human trafficking. 
It covers 194 countries, of which 13 are in Southeast Europe: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Greece, Kosovo, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia and Turkey. 
Turkey a "police state"? 
Some of the most serious allegations concern the state of the media in Turkey, where numerous journalists have faced lawsuits aimed – according to press freedom advocates -- at intimidating them. "Prosecutors harassed writers, journalists, and political figures by bringing dozens of cases to court under various laws that restrict media freedom," the State Department said, adding that judges eventually rejected many of those charges. 
Citing local media, the report said that by the end of 2010, authorities had filed more than 5,000 cases against journalists covering the Ergenekon trial and that over 20 people had been convicted. According to the Solidarity Platform of Imprisoned Journalists, 43 journalists, including ten editors in chief, were in jail in Turkey at the end of last year. 
 Moreover, the report said, "human rights organisations and monitors, as well as lawyers and doctors involved in documenting human rights violations, continued to face detention, prosecution, intimidation, harassment, and closure orders for their activities." 
 One high-profile case involved Muharrem Erbey, vice-president of Turkey's Human Rights Association (HRA) and head of its branch in the southeastern city of Diyarbakir. He is among 151 suspects tried for disrupting the integrity of the state, being a member and/or administrator of the Kurdish Communities Union (KCK), the political branch of the terrorist Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK), and other charges. 
"The HRA and many international human rights organisations continued to claim that Erbey was arrested for his work at the HRA and as a human rights lawyer," the State Department report said. 
Dozens of people in Turkey were killed during the year after failing to stop at police checkpoints, according to Ozturk Turkdogan, chairman of the HRA. "Although it is blatantly against the constitution, the government did not take any measures," he told SETimes. 
"There is a police regime in charge right now in Turkey," Turkdogan said. 
The authorities in Ankara, however, have rebuffed such allegations, saying they do not reflect reality. 
 "No one has a right to break the law," said Salih Kapusuz, deputy leader of the ruling Justice and Development Party, in an interview with SETimes. "If writers, journalists or others are on trial for having links to terrorist organisations or coup-plotters, these arrests have nothing to do with the government." 
As for the deaths at police checkpoints, such accidents can happen everywhere, even in the United States, Kapusuz said. Turkey "is not a country with police regime, it is a country where law and order rule," he said. 
Funding a problem in BiH  
In the majority of Southeast European countries, domestic and international human rights groups generally operated without government restriction and were able to investigate and publish their findings on human rights cases. However, the levels of co-operation between representatives of the local and national authorities and NGOs varied from country to country. 
In BiH, for example, "government officials were often inefficient and slow to respond" to civil groups' recommendations. 
"The slow work of the goverment is an enormous problem, since their measures often arrive when the problem has already advanced, so only the consequences are addressed instead of tackling the reasons," Miralem Tursinovic, of the Helsinki Citizens' Assembly and Youth Resource Centre, tells SETimes. 
 Furthermore, the State Department report found that BiH authorities provided financial support to only non-politically oriented NGOs. 
"Instead of following set guidelines and criteria, the government commissions that allocated public benefit funds seemed to base many of their decisions on political interest and allocated large percentages of funds to predetermined beneficiaries such as religious communities, sports organisations, and veterans associations," the report on BiH said. 
Journalist and analyst Almir Seckanovic told SETimes that this translates into limited influence, given scarce funding these days. "In BiH, there are hardly any independent NGOs because they are all dependent on government budget money and so the government absolutely ignores their opinions." 
Serbian electronic communications law faces scrutiny  
As for internet access, the report found that for the vast majority of SEE countries "there were no government restrictions on access … or reports that the authorities monitored e-mail or internet chat rooms." 
While that applied to Serbia as well, the State Department cited "some isolated reports" that the government continued to monitor e-mail. 
The commissioner for public information and the protection of personal data, Rodoljub Sabic, told SETimes that this probably referred to the law on electronic communication, as well as to laws regulating the work of military security services. 
Sabic added that due to certain provisions of these laws, he and ombudsman Sasa Jankovic submitted a request in late September 2010 for an assessment of constitutionality before the Constitutional Court of Serbia, which has yet to rule on the matter. 
"The disputed provisions ... allow the application of special measures that deviate from the secrecy of letters and other forms of communication and thereby breach the privacy of citizens, not only in accordance with a court decision, but even without a court order," Sabic said. 
In Turkey, the government encouraged use of the internet, which was widely available in public institutions and in 42% of households. However, there were some restrictions, as courts and an independent board ordered telecommunications providers to block access to websites on numerous occasions. 
Citing a study by Engelliweb, an NGO focusing on internet freedom issues, the report noted that by the end of October, "6,457 sites had been blocked in the country, a substantial increase over the reported numbers in 2009." 
The constitutions and/or laws of all SEE nations provide for freedom of speech and of the press. According to the report, the governments of both parts of Cyprus, of Greece, Kosovo and Romania "generally respected these rights in practice" and that of Albania respected "many" of them. 
Alakbar Raufoglu, Igor Jovanovic and Bedrana Kaletovic also contributed to this article. 
To view the entire 2010 US State Department Human Rights report, click here. 
