26/10/2006
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb – 26/10/06
Branimir Glavas, a parliamentary representative from the Croatian region of Slavonia, is the highest-ranking politician in the country to be officially investigated for war crimes. He will have to testify in court about whether he had anything to do with the torture and murder of Serbs in the town of Osijek in 1991, at the start of the war for Croatian independence from the former Yugoslavia. 
Osijek, located in the eastern part of Croatia, was heavily targeted during the war. Investigations have since shown that Serb civilians in the town were victimised and killed. Just a few days ago, Croatian police arrested six former Croatian soldiers in connection with the same case. 
Prosecutors say the defendants tied up and taped the mouths of six victims -- all of Serbian ethnicity -- and threw them into the Drava River. 
Following a lengthy parliamentary committee session, lawmakers withdrew Glavas' political immunity. Although the veteran politician belongs to a regional party, his influence is said to extend well beyond it. Opponents have characterised him as a "warlord" of the Slavonia region. 
For years, Glavas belonged to the ruling HDZ party. He was the key figure in charge of Slavonia under the first Croatian president, Franjo Tudjman. But the government had to keep him in check because of his disputes with the UN transitional administration in the region. He had many open quarrels with the UN's mission head, General Jacques Klein. 
Nongovernmental organisations have long suspected that he knew about the murders of Serbs at the beginning of the war, but it was only a year ago that an investigation officially began. It was then that Glavas became a persona non grata in the ruling HDZ and set up his own party. He insists that he is innocent and that the charges are a set-up by his former HDZ colleagues. 
However, Glavas has not been put in custody yet. Although the state attorney's office in Zagreb has demanded his arrest, the decision was transferred to the judge in Osijek, where Glavas lives. The judge, Mario Kovac, claims he does not have the legal authority to put him in jail. 
Attorneys for Glavas have launched an appeal in the Zagreb County Court, arguing that proper procedures were not followed. Glavas himself, meanwhile, says he feels "free as a bird". 
His case is of considerable interest to the Croatian public. His influence in the eastern provinces is huge, and he is credited by many for defending Osijek during the war. For this reason, his possible detention is a subject of hot debate. 
