25/09/2009
(FT, Wall Street Journal, SBS - 25/09/09; AP, Reuters, AFP, DPA, CNN, BBC, Guardian, UN News Centre - 24/09/09)
After more than two decades of failed attempts to find an HIV vaccine, a breakthrough came Thursday (September 24th), as researchers announced the results of a large clinical trial in Thailand. 
Health officials said a combination of vaccines used in the experiment cut the risk of becoming infected with the virus that causes AIDS by more than 31%. 
Over 16,000 HIV-negative volunteers aged 18-30, at average risk of contracting the disease, participated in the test conducted by the Thai health ministry. The US Army and the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) sponsored the 71.5m-euro project, dubbed RV144. 
"It is found that the vaccine has 31.2% efficacy in reducing the risk of HIV infection," the DPA quoted Thai Health Minister Withaya Kaewparadai as saying at a news conference in Bangkok on Thursday. "The outcome represents a breakthrough in HIV vaccine development because for the first time ever, there is evidence that HIV vaccine has preventative efficacy." 
Two vaccines -- ALVAC from Sanofi Pasteur, the vaccine division of French drug company Sanofi Aventis, and AIDSVAX, originally developed by US-based VaxGen Inc. that is now owned by the non-profit Global Solutions for Infectious Diseases -- were used in the trial that targeted HIV strains circulating in Thailand. As with other vaccines, neither of the two showed positive effects when used individually in previous tests. 
Half of the participants in what has been described as the largest HIV vaccine trial to date received placebo injections. The rest received four "priming" doses of ALVAC and two "boost" doses of AIDSVAX over six months. All participants underwent HIV blood tests every six months for three years. 
"We had 74 infections in the placebo group and 51 in the vaccine group," Dr. Jerome Kim, a US Army colonel who helped lead the trial, told Reuters by telephone. "Although the level of protection that we saw was clearly modest, the study is a major scientific advance." 
As the study focused on HIV strains common in Thailand, it is unclear whether the approach will be effective against most of the thousands of other strains circulating in Africa and elsewhere in the world. Still, scientists and officials hailed the news as a major step in the fight against AIDS, which caused the deaths of 2 million people in the world in 2007, according to UNAIDS estimates. 
NIAID chief Anthony Fauci said researchers now have to find out how this vaccine regimen cut the risk of HIV infection, cautioning that it may take years before a more effective AIDS vaccine is developed. 
"This is the beginning of the effort," he said. "It has opened up a door for us to ask some very important fundamental science questions, as well as some clinical questions." 
But the results of the trial, Fauci added, gave him reason for cautious optimism, as there now seem to be "brighter lights" on the road ahead. 
"We need to bring the best minds together and map the way forward," he said. 
