07/03/2011
By Alexander Christie-Miller for Southeast European Times in Istanbul -- 07/03/11
Is Turkey's long-running probe into the alleged Ergenekon organisation a crusade to bring ultranationalist plotters to justice, or a tool to crush government critics? 
This bitterly disputed question has dogged the investigation into the alleged "deep-state" conspiracy since the case was opened nearly four years ago. 
But some commentators believe recent arrests may dramatically alter perceptions of what has been dubbed Turkey's "trial of the century": a sprawling criminal inquiry encompassing more than 200 suspects and thousands of pages of evidence. 
On Thursday (March 3rd), 11 journalists and writers critical of the government, including one who last year received an international press accolade, were arrested for alleged links to Ergenekon. 
Officials from the EU and United States, as well as Turkish and international journalist organisations, responded by voicing concerns over press freedom in Turkey. 
Orhan Kemal Cengiz, a human rights lawyer who has staunchly defended the Ergenekon probe, believes the arrests threaten to cast a shadow over the entire case. 
"Unless the prosecutors can produce substantial evidence this will be a huge blow to the investigation," he told SETimes. 
He criticised prosecutors for pursuing purported coup plots instead of focusing on extrajudicial killings and other more tangible unsolved crimes that have been linked to Ergenekon. 
He was particularly shocked by the arrest of Ahmet Sik, a journalist who had himself unearthed evidence exposing coup plots. Another detainee was Nedim Sener, a reporter for the daily Milliyet newspaper, who was last year named a World Press Freedom Hero by the International Press Institute. 
Gareth Jenkins, a Turkey-based analyst, has long alleged that the Ergenekon investigation is a tool to intimidate opposition to the country's Justice and Development Party (AKP) government. 
"But it's never been as blatant as this," he told SETimes. "There is no way Sik and Sener are ultranationalists." He believes hard-line activists within the influential Fethullah Gulen religious community, which has strong representation within the AKP, are behind the latest arrests. 
Sener had previously written about the Gulen movement's alleged infiltration of Turkey's police force, and Sik has been writing a book on the same subject. 
Soli Ozel, a professor of political science at Istanbul's Bilgi University, said the arrests of Sik and Sener were "vindictive", and pointed to collusion between police and prosecutors. 
"These arrests defy credibility unless the prosecutors can come up very fast with evidence -- and not fabricated evidence -- that these guys have been living a double life," he told SETimes. 
However, Bulent Kenes, editor-in-chief of the government-friendly and Gulen-affiliated Today's Zaman newspaper, cautioned against jumping to conclusions. 
 "It is unethical and illegal to create much noise about an investigation that is being conducted with secrecy and to declare that all of the investigated journalists are innocent," he wrote on Friday. 
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has repeatedly insisted his administration had no hand in the arrests. 
But according to Taraf daily newspaper Editor-in-Chief Ahmet Altun, Erdogan's government may face "the darkest period in its political existence" unless it offers a credible explanation for the latest detentions. 
"They had better realise the situation is so serious that it cannot be passed over with shallow talk," he wrote in a column Friday. 
