28/06/2005
(Blic - 28/06/05; Reuters, AKI, HINA, FENA, Focus - 27/06/05)
The presidents of Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro have called for strengthened relations among their countries with the aim of achieving their common goal of EU membership. For this to happen, the three countries must deal with the legacies of the conflicts in the early 1990s and enhance co-operation in a number of fields, the leaders said in a joint statement signed in Belgrade on Monday (27 June). 
"The burden of the wars must be removed to further normalise relations, one of the key preconditions for joining the EU," BiH Presidency Chairman Borislav Paravac, Croatian President Stipe Mesic and Serbia-Montenegro President Svetozar Marovic said in the declaration. "Europe must be built in the region if we wish to turn the region into a part of united Europe," they added in the statement, entitled "A Triple View of the Present and the Future". 
The three leaders met in Belgrade within the framework of the 10th session of the so-called Igman Initiative, uniting the signatories of the Dayton Peace Accords and consisting of some 140 NGOs from BiH, Croatia and Serbia-Montenegro. 
Calling for an objective approach to the past, the document also stresses the need for full and unconditional co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), including the delivery of all war crimes indictees to The Hague-based court. 
All those who committed war crimes -- including, but not limited to, the perpetrators of the 1995 massacre at Srebrenica -- must face justice, the Croatian news agency HINA quoted Marovic as saying in his opening address. "This is why the case of [former Bosnian Serb] General [Ratko] Mladic must be closed as soon as possible," he said, adding that his country was determined to make every effort for that to happen. 
"The truth about the past also means apologising, admitting responsibility and expressing regret," Mesic said in his speech. "Responsibility and guilt can and must be established exclusively on an individual basis before a court, whether international or domestic," he added, insisting that the people of a country cannot be held responsible for the crimes committed in their name. 
Addressing the meeting, Paravac called for the establishment of good neighbourly relations among the three countries to secure a better future for all. 
"We must be open and sincere in acquainting the young generations with the truth about events from the past, we are obliged to mend the broken ties and establish new relations and co-operation because we are responsible for the future of our peoples and states," the BiH leader said. 
The declaration signed Monday also calls for promotion and acceleration of refugee returns and for ensuring that the rights of national minorities are protected. The three presidents urged the establishment of a visa-free regime and the removal of all obstacles barring the successful normalisation of relations. 
"Our trilateral declaration shows and proves our maturity for a European future," Mesic said, describing it also as a message to those in the three countries "who would prefer to see us isolated and turned against one another, as well as to Europe, where some still doubt if we belong among them". 
Participants accepted a proposal declaring 11 July as a day commemorating the Srebrenica massacre and all innocent victims of the wars in the former Yugoslavia. 
