16/06/2005
(AP, Euro-reporters, Kosovareport, Radio B92 - 15/06/05)
Only days after the launch of a UN-sponsored review of Kosovo's progress in meeting a set of democratic standards, international officials urged the province's leadership Wednesday (15 June) to step up efforts to improve minorities' freedom of movement. During talks in Pristina, representatives of the Contact Group for Kosovo also criticised the lack of progress made in the area of local government reform. 
The Contact Group comprises Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Russia and the United States. Senior diplomats, representing those six nations and the EU, arrived in Pristina on Wednesday for talks with Kosovo President Ibrahim Rugova, Prime Minister Bajram Kosumi and Parliament Speaker Nexhat Daci. The meeting was also attended by UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen and Kai Eide, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's special envoy, who arrived in Kosovo on Monday for the standards review. 
The standards, which have been endorsed by the Security Council, cover eight areas, namely, democratic institutions, rule of law, refugee returns, freedom of movement, human and minority rights, the economy, the Kosovo Protection Corps and Pristina-Belgrade dialogue. Their implementation is a prerequisite for the start of talks on the province's final status. The process is likely to begin this autumn, if Eide's report -- expected in September -- concludes that Kosovo has made sufficient progress in achieving the standards. 
"It is now up to the political leaders and institutions to show that they are acting to build a stable, tolerant, multiethnic, and democratic society in Kosovo, one in which all communities live in peace with each other and which is at peace with its neighbours," Jessen-Petersen said earlier this week. 
After Wednesday's meeting, Kosumi said there were differences in opinion when the issues of local government reform and free movement were discussed. The local government reform envisions the creation of a number of smaller municipalities, whose authorities have more power in running affairs. The move would also ensure that ethnic minorities' voices on issues affecting their lives are better heard. 
However, the process has been delayed by criticism from opposition parties, Kosumi indicated. 
Following the talks with Kosovo Albanian officials, the representatives of the Contact Group met also with Kosovo Serb leaders, who described the discussion as largely constructive. According to Belgrade-based Radio B92, the Kosovo Serb leaders are planning to work actively with Eide, who included many of the views shared by their community in his first report on Kosovo last year. 
