13/01/2010
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 13/01/10 
On Monday [January 11th], a group of 200 Serbian intellectuals called for a referendum on membership in NATO, claiming that the Belgrade authorities are secretly moving towards the Alliance. 
"Serbia has on several occasions announced it 'will never recognise the independent state of Kosovo', meaning it will never join NATO. 'Independent Kosovo' is the work of NATO, which created that state and awarded itself supreme and absolute power in it," said the intellectuals in a statement, read by writer Matija Beckovic. 
The loosely organised group -- with members from across the Serbian political spectrum -- has not worked together before, apparently coming together specifically to oppose NATO membership. 
According to their document, a key reason against joining NATO is the 1999 action in the former Yugoslavia by the Alliance, which killed an estimated 2,500 civilians. 
The group said its fears of a secret agreement are confirmed by a news release following a December 4th meeting of NATO foreign ministers in Brussels. 
It said NATO "welcomed the measures Serbia recently took to strengthen co-operation with the Alliance", though the Serbian public was unaware of any such measures. 
Surveys suggest the majority of Serbian citizens oppose NATO membership. On November 7th 2009, the Centre for Free Elections and Democracy unveiled the results of a poll showing 51% of the population is against membership. Only 25% were found to be in favour. 
Defence Minister Dragan Sutanovac, however, believes it is logical for Serbia to join NATO. 
"It is true that no one is setting NATO membership as a condition for Serbia's EU membership, but it is also true that if we wish to establish European value systems in Serbia, we have to include the Euro-Atlantic security system," Sutanovac told the Belgrade daily Press, adding he sees no negative consequences to Serbia by joining NATO. 
However, retired Army General Bozidar Delic, now a representative of the opposition Serbian Progressive Party, said that by joining, Serbia could lose support from Russia, a key ally. 
Moscow has consistently defended Belgrade's position against recognising Kosovo as independent. 
All of Serbia's neighbours are either already in NATO or seeking membership. Serbia became a member of NATO's Partnership for Peace programme in December 2006. NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen said in October 2009 that the Alliance wants to see Serbia become a member. 
In December 2007, Serbia pledged military neutrality through a resolution adopted in parliament. 
