15/12/2011
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 15/12/11
Macedonia's Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Supply began a new practice in late November called "traveling office" that is drawing positive reactions from citizens and government employees alike. 
The ministry decided it would serve best Macedonia's farmers if it visits them to address -- on the spot -- any issues they face in their work. 
Agriculture demands constant physical presence and care of the land. By not travelling to Skopje to meet with requisite ministry personnel, the ministry argued it will save farmers time, increase productivity and address any issues more effectively. 
That includes Agriculture Minister Ljupco Dimovski, Deputy Minister Zoran Konjanovski and other key representatives who decided to personally be present wherever there may be problems or concerns. 
The traveling office will function throughout the year: no weekends, no holidays, no exceptions. 
Konjanovski told SETimes that field work is the only way to help each farmer. 
"We have started [the practice] in Strumica, continued in Resen and will visit farmers throughout Macedonia. In the afternoon, in every region we have a debate with the focus on issues the farmers are interested in," Konjanovski said. 
To be able to carry out the new practice in the year ahead, the ministry will purchase a special vehicle which will be equipped as an office, he said. 
Besides ministry personnel -- including from regional offices -- the office will include employees of the agency for financial support of agriculture and rural development. 
The practice provides opportunities for cross-government work as well. Last week, the agency's Director Toni Dimovski joined Dimovski and Konjanovski at the meeting in the town of Resen, which is known for its apple production. 
More than 50 individual farmers, co-operatives and associations of fruit producers took the opportunity to discuss their concerns, ask questions and offer suggestions to the ministry's leadership within the framework of the travelling office. 
The main issues discussed generally related to the payment of subsidies as well as problems with the purchase of the apple crop. Farmers proposed specific ideas and measures to resolve the problems of fruit producers in the wider Prespa region. 
Resen farmer Tome Dimeski told SETimes the practice is a great opportunity to address the right people and specify which segments are facing problems. 
"I have told the minster that this activity is excellent. I had a problem with the payment of subsidies and the application for EU funds that can be used to increase production. I also received assistance in completing the specific documentation needed for apple purchase." 
Agriculture analyst Trajche Stojanov told SETimes the idea is praised on all sides, particularly the fact that the farmer's genuine needs are expressed directly to those who need to hear them most, allowing for opportunities to address them most effectively. 
"The ministry may want to direct resources to prepare farmers' programmes from the information it obtains in the field. That will provide the basis for a long-term development strategy for Macedonian agriculture, which is in urgent need of an infusion," Stojanov said. 
Officials have said Macedonia wants modern agriculture and is aware it has to work hard and exchange positive experiences with other, more developed agricultural countries. 
The ministry has already issued a public call for allocation of financial assistance for projects relating to agriculture and rural development. 
SETimes correspondent Aleksandar Pavlevski contributed to this article. 
