15/02/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 15/02/05
The Macedonian government has decided to sell the most valuable state-owned enterprise, Elektrostopanstvo na Makedonija (ESM), to a foreign investor. The utility will be sold without a prior initial price, although its current value has been estimated at 1.3 billion euros. The tender procedure should start in May and the bid is expected to be selected by the end of the year. 
"Fifty-one per cent of the ESM value will be sold to a foreign investor in one package," Economy Minister Fatmir Besimi said, adding that the sale is intended to make the enterprise more attractive and avoid a monopoly position. 
"The government has decided not to sell ESM at prior determined price, but to allow a foreign investor to create the price in a tender," Besimi said. "The maximum price should be achieved. In this, we are following the suit of European countries that have exercised the same model in selling their power-supply public utilities." 
 The government is planning to use the proceeds from the sale of ESM to fund different economic development projects. The enterprise was transformed into two companies -- ESM Joint Stock Company and Macedonian Electro-Transmission System Operator (MEPSO) on 1 January. The first of these will be sold, while MEPSO will remain state-owed. 
Besimi said the state will keep around 30 per cent of the ESM shares so that the Energy Regulatory Commission is able to supervise all financial transactions of the two entities, and also to prevent the new owner from forming a monopoly. The EBRD, which will turn its 45m euro worth of pre-privatisation credit into shares, will own around 20 per cent of the enterprise. 
The ESM privatisation is in line with the EU directives, and is one of the preconditions Macedonia must meet before it can sign an agreement establishing a common energy market with other Southeast European countries -- a document considered essential for the country's bid to join the EU. 
