19/03/2007
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade - 19/07/03
This month marks ten years since Zoran Djindjic was elected Belgrade's first non-communist mayor since World War II. It also marks a grimmer occasion: his assassination four years ago by a gunman with apparent ties to organised crime and Slobodan Milosevic. 
On March 12th, 2003 a sniper in a window shot Djindjic as he prepared to enter the Serbian government building, delivering a fatal wound to the heart. The murder came only days after an earlier attempt on his life, during which a truck driven by a criminal gang member attempted to force the then prime minister's car off the highway. 
The killing ended a remarkable, complicated career. Djindjic was a professional philosopher turned politician, a socialist who championed free market reforms, and a pro-Western reformist who, nevertheless, made common cause with the likes of Radovan Karadzic. Although he helped lead a democratic revolution, he was not particularly charismatic. And although a pivotal figure in Serbian politics, he remains controversial. 
A decade ago, the Milosevic regime suffered a major setback when it was forced to concede defeat in local elections. Key races were won by the Together coalition, a loose, fractious alliance of political forces opposed to Milosevic. After the regime failed in its bid to annul the vote, Djindjic became mayor. "
The government that is now being constituted will be the government for the people, and not the government over the people. It will not be a government in Belgrade, but the government for Belgrade," he said upon taking office. The new mayor would eventually go on to become prime minister, heading a reformist administration until his murder 
The coming to power of Djindjic and the Together coalition, both in the capital and other Serbian cities, was followed by political demonstrations. With authorities refusing to acknowledge the defeat the Socialist Party of Serbia and its coalition partner, Yugoslav Left, civil and student protests erupted and lasted for 88 days. 
The election results were acknowledged only after international pressure induced Milosevic to propose a lex specialis, or special legislation. Because of the government's disinclination to acknowledge the Together coalition's victory in 13 Serbian cities and nine districts of the capital, it was three months before the Belgrade Parliament could be constituted. 
Within weeks of taking power, the coalition broke apart due to internal disputes -- a problem that would continue to plague the democratic bloc in successive years. Through the combined efforts of Milosevic's Socialists, Vojislav Seselj's Radicals and the Serbian Renewal Movement of Vuk Draskovic, Djindjic was replaced. 
Recalling those days, current mayor Nenad Bogdanovic said that the post carried little authority at the time, while the regime continually disturbed Djindjic's work. Today Belgrade is free to make use of its resources, but even this is not enough to bring about everything that Djindjic planned for the capital. 
"I believe that he would say -- but let me be personal -- I believe he would tell me, 'it is good, but you can do better'," Bogdanovic says. "And I will, naturally, answer him: 'all right, it can always be better'". 
The anniversary of Djindjic's election as mayor was marked by the Serbian parliament. In addition, a special commemorative exhibition was held, displaying notes and other documents from the period, along with personal items. 
However, the Serbian public is still at odds over where Belgrade should name a street after Djindjic. A recent initiative led by the late prime minister's Democratic Party collected more than 30,000 signatures calling for Avnoj Boulevard in New Belgrade to be renamed Boulevard Zorana Djindjica. But the Committee for Renaming Streets, despite having convened on four occasions, has still not tackled the issue. The reason is that committee members from Vojislav Kostunica's Democratic Party of Serbia, along with the Radicals and Socialists, have stayed away. For the time being, the only move to honour Djindjic has been to designate a "Platform of Zoran Djindjic" in downtown Belgrade's Square of the Republic. 
 In neighboring Bosnia and Herzegovina, meanwhile, the Banja Luka citizen's association Grad voted to submit proposals to the city government to name a street after Djindjic. Terming the late leader a true patriot and a visionary concerning the European future of the Serbian people, the association also noted that Djindjic was born in Bosnia and Herzegovina – in Bosanski Samac, to be exact. 
Four years after his assassination, court proceedings against those accused of his murder are still under way. Almost from the outset, the trial has suffered repeated obstacles and setbacks. "Protected witnesses" have been murdered. Prosecutors have withdrawn for shadowy reasons. Then, last year, presiding judge Marko Klajevic stepped down after corruption charges were brought against his brother. 
The proceedings have been reinitiated under a new chairperson, Nata Mesarovic, but the new court council now has to familiarize itself with the documents, transcripts and other evidence introduced under her predecessor. If, as some have suggested, the "trial of the century" demonstrates the degree to which rule of law has been established in Serbia, the assessment is still mixed. Reform in Serbia has survived the death of the political figure who most strongly personified it, but the pace has slowed. Meanwhile, unresolved war crimes issues and the Kosovo dilemma have put up roadblocks along the pro-Western path he espoused. Ten years after his brief but significant tenure as Belgrade mayor, the legacy of Zoran Djindjic remains incomplete. 
