16/09/2004
By Ardi Pulaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana - 16/09/04
Meeting in Tirana for an annual conference, representatives of central election commissions (CEC) from Central and East European countries promised financial assistance in organising Albania's parliamentary elections, scheduled for 2005. 
The conference, held from 9 September to 11 September, brought together delegations from 21 member countries of the Association of Central and Eastern Europe Election Officials (ACEEEO). Nearly 140 from central election commissions were in attendance, as well as representatives of institutions that specialise in elections and companies that produce election infrastructure. 
The central topic was the need to increase voter turnout -- a problem which participants described as not only an Albanian one, but a regional and European one. ACEEEO President Ilirian Celibashi -- the first Albanian to serve in that position -- called for an analysis of the reasons for the drop in turnout and for efforts to identify the most efficient ways to halt the trend. 
As Albania prepares for its parliamentary elections, the international community is urging the government and the political parties to assist with the preliminary process. On 10 September, European Commission Ambassador to Tirana Lutz Saltzman and OSCE Ambassador Osmo Lipponen -- both of whom attended the ACEEEO conference's opening session -- reiterated the importance of free and fair elections for Albania's integration into European structures. 
Citing voters' lists as the main concern, Saltzman and Lipponen urged politicians to act on the recommendations of a bipartisan parliamentary commission on election reform. The EU has said it will disburse 800,000 euros to the OSCE Mission to Albania to solve problems with voters' lists. 
The ACEEEO, founded in 1991 and based in Budapest, operates independently from parties and governments. It has 21 institutional members and enjoys participatory status with the Council of Europe. This year, the ACEEEO became associated with the UN Department of Public Information. The organisation's primary objective is to foster free, democratic and fair elections and to provide a forum for the exchange of information on election and political processes among election officials and scientific experts. 
