05/07/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 05/07/10
Tensions in Mitrovica were exacerbated further on Monday (July 5th) as a Kosovo Serb lawmaker was shot and wounded outside his home. Police are searching for the assailants. 
 Petar Miletic, a member of the Serbian Independent Liberal Party (SLS), was reportedly fired at four times. One bullet struck him in the thigh, though the wound was not serious. He is currently recovering at a local hospital. 
On Friday, Miletic spoke to SETimes about the situation in northern Kosovo, saying it was "tense, but quiet" following Friday's grenade attack on a demonstration in Mitrovica. 
Pediatrician Mesud Dzekovic was wounded fatally in the blast and 11 others were injured. According to Miletic, the victim was a "prominent and respectable" member of the community and his death has fueled anxiety among Kosovo Serbs. 
"Those to blame for the incident are the Kosovo police, the person who decided to open that office, the protest organisers, and of course the man who dropped the hand grenade," he told SETimes. 
"Of course I worry about ethnic violence and you can not be sure that incidents like this will not happen again. The Kosovo Police need reform and after that maybe we can start believing them," he said. 
 Friday's incident took place as around a thousand local Serbs gathered to protest the opening of a Kosovo government office -- the Civil Services Centre -- in Mitrovica's Bosnian Mahalla district. 
Adem Mripa, the Albanian representative for the district, accused Serbs of setting up the incident. 
"What happened [Friday] was prepared beforehand by the Serb parallel structures and the Serbian Interior Ministry (MUP)," he insisted. 'We guard the area during the night due to the continuous provocations of these parallel structures." 
Kosovo police in the north are largely composed of Serbs from the area. "We don't trust much those who wear the uniform of the Kosovo Police in the northern areas," Mripa said. "They are directly financed by the MUP." 
"There will be provocations again," he warned. 
Kosovo Prime Minister Hashim Thaci said his government remains committed to "the rule of law and order" and to serving the interests of all Kosovo citizens 
"I am determined, there is no turning back, not a millimeter," Thaci said. 
KFOR Commander General Markus Bentler said the NATO force "recognises the right to peaceful protest and strongly condemns this act of violence against a peaceful demonstration". 
“I will not tolerate any act which threatens the security and stability of Kosovo. I will do everything necessary to support the Kosovo Police, EULEX and other institutions in maintaining a safe and secure environment throughout the territory," Bentler said, urging people to remain calm. 
Commenting on the incident, International Civilian Office spokesman Andy McGuffie said a thorough investigation has to follow and any perpetrators have to be brought to justice. 
"The ICO supports the opening of the Civil Services Centre by the Kosovo institutions today and we see no reason for anyone to be threatened by this office," he said. "It offers much needed services by the Kosovo institutions for all citizens to acquire civil documents." 
"There is no question of any citizen being forced to use the office. It is for the convenience of the citizens who wish to obtain civil documentation," McGuffie added. 
