10/04/2006
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 10/04/06 Photos courtesy of Paul Ciocoiu 
Traveling past the Carpathians through the Red Tower Strait, leaving behind what foreigners refer to as Wallachia, a visitor enters a whole new world -- Transylvania. The first thing to notice is the architecture. Saxon villages feature stone houses with shingle roofs, perfectly lined up along the street, and with back courtyards. It is a tradition associated with Central Europe, and entirely different from that found elsewhere in Romania. 
The city of Sibiu has a distinctive medieval atmosphere. If not for the cars in the street or the fancy shops, it would be easy to imagine one has journeyed back in time. Lying at the foot of the Fagaras Mountains, Sibiu has stood sentry at the gate of this legendary province for nine centuries. 
First attested in a document written in 1191 by Pope Celestin III, Sibiu was once known as Hermannsdorf, then -- after gaining the rank of civitas in 1366 -- as Hermannstadt. In 1919, one year after Transylvania returned to the mother country, the name of the city officially became Sibiu. 
Loaded with history, the city that withstood a siege led by Sultan Murad II himself in 1438 boasts a myriad of superlatives: here opened the first hospital in Romania, the first documented school, the first museum, the first pharmacy and the first paper mill. The first book in Romanian was printed in Sibiu, and it is also the place where the world's first experiments with rockets took place. 
 It would take whole pages to list all the beauties the city offers. The best way is to discover them yourself and enjoy every surprise you may find around the corner, raising the dust of these ancient streets just as countless generations have done since the 12th century. 
A good place to start would be the ASTRA National Museum Complex, the largest open air museum in Europe. This ethnographical museum, opened in 1967, spreads across 96 hectares and delights visitors with its 340 buildings, including watermills and windmills, gigantic wine, fruit and oil presses, fueling mills, forges and other structures representing architectural styles from around the country. A small, quiet piece of Romania unfolds as you savour it from a traditional horse-drawn cart. The complex includes the Emil Sigerus Saxon Ethnography and Folk Art Museum and the Franz Binder World Ethnography Museum. 
If your appetite for tradition is not quenched yet, then take the tramway, the second one to be built in Europe, to Marginimea Sibiului, a unique 18-village ethnographical area where you can also visit Europe's largest museum of glass-painted icons. 
The Bruckental Museum, the first of its kind in Romania and the second in Europe, displays the art collections and the library of Samuel von Bruckental, former governor of Transylvania. His former residence houses paintings signed by Rubens, Botticelli, Jan van Dyck and Titian, among many other renowned artists. The list of museums goes on: the History Museum, the Pharmacy Museum, the Museum of Arms and Hunting Trophies, the Natural Museum, the Steam Locomotives Museum. A single card opens the doors of each of them. 
Moreover, Sibiu itself is an open-air museum. Walking down the old cobblestone streets gives you the chance to take a closer look at the vestiges of another era. The town has two levels: the Upper Town, which contains most of Sibiu's historic sites, and the Lower Town. They are connected through the Stairs Passage, built in the 13th century. The Large Square is the historic core of Sibiu, which was mentioned for the first time in 1411 as a corn market. As with most central squares of medieval towns, this is the place where public meetings -- and public executions -- used to be held. The Small Square is surrounded by preserved medieval buildings, mostly craftsmen's houses and workshops, and provides easy access to the ethnographical museums. 
As the citadel of Sibiu was for centuries a fortress at the gates of Transylvania, it was surrounded by walls and defense towers, most of which still proudly stand: the Council Tower, built in the 13th century, the Harquebusiers' Tower, the Potters' Tower, the Carpenters' Tower, all built in the 15th century, the Thick Tower, erected at the middle of the 16th century, the Haller Bastion, built in 1552, the circular Gunpowder Tower and the Tanners' Tower. Rising over the tile roofs, 15 old churches, masterpieces of architecture, command respect, be they Evangelical, Orthodox, Catholic, Protestant, Franciscan or Ursuline. 
For those who want to get a sense of the present and its pastimes, there's a hideaway just 35km from Sibiu: the Paltinis resort. And since we have been discussing superlatives, we may as well add one more: Paltinis is the highest (1440m) and the oldest resort in Romania. Built in 1894, it boasts four hotels, six chalets and 17 villas for tourists, many restaurants, bars and shops. 
In 2007, marking Romania's EU accession, Sibiu will become the 32nd European Cultural Capital together with Luxembourg, following its nomination by the Culture Ministers' Council of the EU in 2004. The municipality has undertaken an ambitious programme of renovation, together with preparing events that will promote cultural co-operation and understanding across the continent. Romania will enter its EU future through the old gates of this storied city. 
