08/07/2004
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo - 08/07/04
A hotline allowing citizens to place free, anonymous calls about possible crimes has been a success, according to the European Union Police Mission (EUPM) in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). During its first three months of operation, the Krimo-Lovci (Crime Hunters) hotline has led to arrests, drug seizures and the recovery of stolen property.
The project was launched in March. Since then, hotline operators -- who are local police officers -- have received 1,734 calls, of which 675 prompted action.
"The EUPM is more than satisfied with what has been achieved with the help of the Krimo-Lovci hotline," said EUPM spokesperson Kilian Wahl. "Most of the calls were about drug and firearm offences, thefts and economic crime, and have resulted in several arrests and charges. One case involved a police officer who was arrested for alleged smuggling. Another 450 cases remain under investigation as a result of information submitted to the hotline."
Media interest in the project has been high, the EUPM says. For security and confidentiality reasons, however, concrete examples of cases resolved through the hotline cannot be released.
In line with its mandate under the Dayton Peace Agreement, the EUPM is monitoring local police forces and advising them on how to achieve higher democratic standards of law enforcement. British and Canadian police hotlines were used as models for establishing Krimo-Lovci.
"We all know that crime is a daily presence. Quite often, citizens have information that could help police catch criminals or prevent crime before it is committed. Even small details, rumours or unintentionally obtained information, might be of importance for the police. With the hotline, citizens can pass this information along while remaining totally anonymous," said the mission's chief spokesperson, Lena Andersson.
The Krimo-Lovci phone number, 080-020-505, is clearly visible on all law enforcement vehicles in BiH. The office of the hotline is located in the EUPM Headquarters in Sarajevo. It is manned by three local police officers, two EUPM monitors and two language assistants. The line is open from 9am to 10pm. There is an answering machine for night calls. Local police officers answer the phone calls, which are translated into English. The tips are then disseminated to the appropriate unit in the field -- a cantonal police station, the Public Security Centre, or the State Border Service -- and to the EUPM co-locators and advisors.
"Since the phone line is free of charge, we receive a certain amount of calls that are not useful at all. But we are quite surprised that, in comparison with the British police hotline, the quantity of calls that are valuable is pretty high. Out of 1,734 calls, as many as 1,059 were valuable for us. This is a very high ratio," said Wahl.
A spokesperson for the federal interior ministry police directorate, Robert Crvtak, took a more cautious view of the hotline's success. "We have to keep in mind that the great majority of the cases are still under investigation," he said. However, he added that the project has the potential to become standard practice in BiH.
