09/06/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 09/06/11
Inflation is becoming a significant challenge for day-to-day life in Kosovo as prices of some basic commodities have increased almost weekly since January. 
Price increases compound an already bleak economic picture, with unemployment at 45% and the region's lowest average monthly salary of 272 euros. 
 "I get 230 euros per month, and when I see the prices, I do not know what to do with it -- pay the electricity bills, feed my family or [cover] other costs. Everyday becomes harder for us to survive," said Pristina teacher Drita Belegu. 
 Some pensioners say the prospects for retirees are even more ominous because pensions are lower than wages. Podujevo retiree Bajram Gashi, 69, told SETimes he must care for his wife and grandchildren on a 75-euro monthly pension. 
"I can survive thanks to the help from some family members. As for my pension, I think very hard how to spend it, because you can buy enough food for the family for just one week," Gashi said. 
He explained that his son and daughter-in-law have been missing since the 1999 Kosovo war, making him a legal guardian of the grandchildren. "They are too young to work and need to go to school. Food prices are high. Life for my family is very hard. I really do not know what to do," he said. 
Artan Hasani, a vendor at a Pristina market, said a fewer people have been shopping in recent months because the prices of some commodities, such as bread and sugar, have risen by half. "Prices are high compared to last year. We have not increased them because we want to, but because we cannot afford to suffer loses," Hasani said. 
Economists blame the price movements on Kosovo's dependence on imports. Serbia's blocking of wheat exports to Kosovo has also impacted the price of basic food products like bread. 
 "Food production in the country is very low, making Kosovo dependent on imports. If there is an increase in prices in Serbia or Macedonia, this will automatically reflect on Kosovo," former Economy Ministry official Ariana Beqiri told SETimes. 
Experts believe the government has no strategy to deal with the situation. Beqiri explained that the current economic policy prevents the government from intervening to set prices. 
 "The government could waive paying VAT for some products to improve the situation but this will not happen because of the arrangement with the IMF," Beqiri said. 
The consumption level, set by economists at 45 euros per person, does not help to stimulate the stagnant economy. A recent World Bank report states that 15% of the Kosovo population is considered extremely poor. 
While consumer prices increased by close to 11% in April compared to April 2010, foods like bread and cereals have been particularly affected. 
Statistical Office of Kosovo representative Ilir Berisha told SETimes that prices fell by a little over 1% this month because electricity is now charged at the cheaper, summer season rate. 
Prices of items such as wheat and bread are expected to stabilise, even decrease, in the near future. 
 "By July, we expect a decrease of prices on wheat products and bread, which will be affected by the increase of local production at that time," Wheat Production Association's Muhamet Farrizi told SETimes. 
Until that happens, however, economists warn that people will need to deal with the higher prices. 
