03/03/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 03/03/05
One of the first steps taken by Romania's new centre-right cabinet was to cut taxes. The new administration significantly reduced the profit tax, from 25 per cent to 16 per cent, and replaced the progressive income tax -- which the previous government planned to increase to 40 per cent -- with a single-rate tax of 16 per cent. Another top priority was the recalculation of pensions. 
These changes, however, have cost the state budget 1.1 billion euros. Authorities hoped to make up for the loss by doubling the taxes on small enterprise revenues and dividends of natural persons, from 1.5 per cent to 3 per cent and 5 per cent to 10 per cent, respectively. They also postponed plans to cut social insurance rates from 49.5 per cent to to 47.5 per cent. 
The tax increases proved unable to compensate for the mounting budget deficit. In order to meet Romania's agreement with the IMF and keep the deficit under 1.5 per cent of GDP, other measures are being taken, all of which go into effect as of 1 April. New taxes for electricity, gas and oil, originally scheduled for 1 July, will become effective three months earlier. Excises for gas, alcohol and cigarettes will also rise sooner than planned. 
Other steps include increasing natural gas prices by 25 per cent, increasing electricity prices by 5 per cent and not raising the salaries of public clerks. April will see a tax increase on bank interest, from 1 per cent to 10 per cent -- matching the tax on capital market profits. The tax on real estate earnings will increase by 6 per cent, from 10 per cent to 16 per cent. People selling property in the first three years of ownership will now pay a 10 per cent tax on the profit they receive. 
 "We'll try to diminish the effects of these measures over the inflation rate as much as possible," said Economy Minister Codrut Seres. Nevertheless, the government's course of action has proved controversial. Marian Milut, the president of the National Union of the Romanian Employers, has said his organisation will challenge the tax hike on dividends in court. The public has not welcomed the new excise and price increases. Meanwhile, some economic analysts warn the 16 per cent single-rate tax could cause growth to spin out of control. 
The government, however, insists things are moving in the right direction. "The reduction was a political decision indeed, but it was based on a well-documented analysis," said Romanian Finance Minister Ionut Popescu. 
