20/04/2012
By Svetla Dimitrova for Southeast European Times in Sofia -- 20/04/12
The merging of official or public holidays, when they fall on a working day, with weekends is common in many countries, but the practice is not strictly followed by some private sector companies in Southeast Europe, creating a disparity between some private sector and public employees. 
This year, Bulgarians have what may be a rare chance for other countries to benefit from a total of six four-day weekends -- two in April, one in each May and September, and the remaining two around Christmas and New Year’s, respectively. 
Barely two weeks after the Orthodox Easter holidays -- from April 13th (Good Friday) to April 16th (Easter Monday) this year -- people in Bulgaria, the country with the lowest productivity within the EU, will celebrate Labour Day on May 1st. As it falls on a Tuesday, the government has decided that April 30th (Monday) will be a non-working day, which will be worked off on Saturday (April 21st). 
While that practice of long weekends may be beneficial for the tourist sector, for instance, it has a negative impact on the economy as a whole, Bulgaria's largest private television station bTV reported on April 10th. Citing an analysis by the Centre for the Study of Democracy (CSD), a Sofia-based think tank, it named industry, banking and certain trade branches as the "biggest losers" from the two extended weekends in April. CSD experts estimated that the losses the Bulgarian economy would suffer as a result of this month alone would total as much as 100m euros. 
"Companies facing deadlines for the execution of contracts and orders will be big losers if they are unable to fulfil their contracts on time and are forced to pay penalties," Tsvetan Simeonov of the Bulgarian Chamber of Commerce and Industry told bTV. "Those who will lose a customer or a market because of the holidays" will be hit even worse. 
Under law, employers must pay workers overtime if they ask them to work on a public holiday, which is unaffordable for many companies during a time of crisis. Those fearing they might lose clients prefer to stay open, however. 
"The turnover is down," Rositsa Kurteva who, together with her sister, runs a florist shop on a usually busy street in Sofia, told SETimes on Easter Monday, when many of the capital's residents had not yet returned home from their four-day vacation. 
Further down the street, Tsvetelina Ivanova, a shop assistant at a store selling packaged goods, like tea, coffee and biscuits, looks equally gloomy. 
"Sofia's empty, so there are no customers," she told SETimes, when asked if there was much work during the holidays. "It's bad. It's very bad." 
To prevent traffic jams on the final day of the holidays, the authorities decided to close the highways for lorries on Easter Monday, making hauliers' job more difficult. 
"I'm fed up with this closing of the roads in recent years. If we're going to be a populist country, they [the government] should say so," Krassimir Lalov, the deputy chair of the National Association of Bulgarian Road Carriers, told SETimes. "Look at all normal countries -- there is no merging of holidays there. That is why people there have money to buy things." 
But the merging or bridging of holidays with weekends is a common practice in Romanian state-owned companies or the state administration where personal performance is not a criterion. But commercial centres, for example, are open on the second day of a public holiday. 
"From my point of view, we have too many free days, especially if they are in the middle of the week. Your production activity is blocked, some of the companies are working, others are not," Alexandru Maineci, owner of Promo Marketing, a producer of advertising materials, told SETimes. "A 21-day paid vacation means almost a month; there are companies which close the doors for a month. If one of these companies is your sole supplier, a one-month vacation can create huge issues with supplying production materials." 
Back in 2006, Macedonia abandoned that practice of bridging a public holiday, falling on a Tuesday for example, with the preceding weekend. Under the current model, which is used also in Kosovo and Serbia, when a state holiday falls on a Sunday, then the following day (Monday) will be non-working day. As elsewhere in the region, that policy is followed by state-owned companies, the state administration and banks, but not always by private sector companies. 
Thus, groceries, for example, are open regularly almost during every holiday, although part-time. But private sector companies, which cannot afford to pay workers the so-called holiday allowance, as required by law, prefer to give them a day off. 
In Serbia, the issue of prolonged holidays has often stirred debates on whether the economy suffers losses because of those extra non-working days. The Serbian Employers' Union recently calculated that a single non-working day costs the country about 12m euros. 
Economist and investment consultant Milan Kovacevic believes not everything is "black and white," arguing that there are countries more developed economically than Serbia that have more non-working days. 
"Fewer holidays would improve private companies' business, because then they could utilise capacities better, with as little cost as possible. However, one should not forget about the workers' right to free time and celebration of holidays," Kovacevic told SETimes. "As far as the public administration is concerned, I think we generally have too much of it and that savings should be made by engaging on holidays only those who have to work, so that they don't pay for additional expenses." 
Salesman Marko Prodanovic, 47, thinks workers' rights are extremely threatened in Serbia and it would be unconscionable to deprive workers of their right to celebrate holidays. 
"Over the course of the entire year we work for low wages and don't know whether we'll be fired tomorrow. If they don't let us celebrate holidays, then we'll have true slavery," Prodanovic told SETimes. "The state and the employers should find a better way of increasing production and saving money, without breaking the backs of workers." 
Kosovo has 12 official holidays and eight memorial days. The Kosovo daily Bota Sot reported in November last year that if one takes into account the weekends of the year and the official holidays, people in Kosovo have over 110 days off during the 365 days of the year, which means, around 30% of the year. 
Ramadan Ilazi, co-founder of Kosovo's "Fol" (Speak Up) Movement, tells SETimes that having too many official holidays is the least of the problems. 
"This is not the reason for having a public administration and a system that is characterised by chronic negligence and lack of professionalism," he said. 
The holiday-merging practice is slightly different in Albania. Under the country's Labour Code, if any of the national holidays falls on a Saturday or a Sunday, the day off is postponed until the first coming working day. In the event two consecutive national holidays, such as Flag and Independence Day on November 28th and Liberation Day on November 29th, fall on Saturday and Sunday, then the following Monday and Tuesday will be non-working days. That plan is followed in the private sector only, but many small and medium-size companies do not pay their workers overtime, as required by law. 
Things changed for public sector workers with the adoption of amendments to the law on national holidays in February 2010, when the provision allowing the postponement of a holiday falling on a weekend day until the first working day was removed for them. 
SETimes correspondents Linda Karadaku in Pristina, Jonilda Koci in Tirana, Marina Stojanovska in Skopje, Gabriel Petrescu in Bucharest and Bojana Milovanovic in Belgrade contributed to this report. 
