19/05/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 19/05/05
This year is widely considered a crucial one for Serbia-Montenegro's EU accession prospects. Momentum is building towards the start of negotiations on a Stabilisation and Accession Agreement (SAA) with the Union, paving the way for eventually receiving candidate status. But hurdles remain, including difficult economic reforms, the issue of Kosovo's final status, and the fact that several persons wanted by the UN war crimes tribunal are still on the run. 
Last month, EU Enlargement Commissioner confirmed that Brussels is looking to this autumn as the date for launching SAA negotiations with Belgrade. "The joint objective of the European Commission and the Council of Ministers of the EU is that by the fifth anniversary of the democratic changes in Serbia, negotiations should be well under way," Rehn said. 
European political and economic institutions have struck a positive note concerning the reform process in Serbia-Montenegro. While acknowledging that Serbia-Montenegro is at a difficult point in its transition, EBRD Resident Peter Sanfey said he is convinced a bright future lies ahead if the reforms continue. 
Domestic public opinion, meanwhile, received a boost from the EU's decision to release a positive feasibility study, setting the stage for the SAA talks. 
According to economists, the main reform tasks facing Belgrade are the continuation of privatisation and restructuring, with the aim of attracting investments and improving performance. The EBRD has also advised the country to lower public spending, which currently represents about 50 per cent of GDP, and to reduce bureaucracy and corruption. Momentum in the reform process was strong during the first two years of the transition, but has since slowed, many analysts say. 
At the same time, the EU Council of Ministers has signaled that it expects the recent improvement in Belgrade's co-operation with the UN war crimes tribunal to continue. Until the remaining fugitives are extradited, the country's EU hopes will hang in the balance. 
The recently established Council for European Integration of the Republic of Serbia, chaired by Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, has concluded that much needs to be done to accelerate the accession process. The council has recommended that the Bureau for EU Accession establish expert working groups to draft the negotiating position of Serbia on the SAA. The group also announced that it will draft a national strategy for accession. 
