05/11/2012
By Klaudija Lutovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 05/11/12
Splits in several government ruling coalitions in the region -- Macedonia, Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) -- are slowing reforms that would improve the economy and help ease integration into European institutions. 
"The Western Balkans is at a crossroads," Tanja Fajon, European Parliament MP, said. "There is no time for hesitation in implementing necessary reforms due to internal political negotiation, because the welfare and safety of citizens and future generations are at stake." 
Ethnic issues and power plays are threatening to dissolve the fragile coalitions that have been organised, sometimes in a last ditch effort, to lead the countries. As the solidarity of the ruling group starts to unravel, political parties start to focus on getting themselves in a power position instead of the country's issues and reforms, analysts said. 
"European diplomats, politicians, observe the situation and realize that the weakest part of the state are interethnic relations," Mirjana Maleska, professor of political science at Southeast European University in Tetovo, told Radio Free Europe. "If they are bad, [this] can lead to more serious crisis, probably cannot happen again armed conflict, but it is enough to paralyze the system." 
In Macedonia, tensions are high over the VMRO-DPMNE party’s proposed a draft law on the benefits for the country's defenders in the 2001 conflict. The ethnic Albanian DUI party rejected the draft, saying that the benefits also needed to extend to the National Liberation Army fighters during that period, which was comprised of mainly Albanians. 
The DUI blocked action on the bill with a five-week filibuster and 15,000 proposed amendments filed last week. 
Analysts say that if DUI withdraws its five ministers from the government, it could open the door to a new parliamentary majority. 
"The problem opened by these two parties overcame their capacities and became a problem of Macedonia, of interethnic relations," Alajdin Demiri, political and legal studies professor at South East European University in Tetovo, told SETimes. 
Analysts said that it is time DUI and VMRO-DPMNE stop the tension. 
"Both parties are allowing internal problems within the coalition to reflect on the work of the institutions. This uncertainty must be stopped," Albert Musliu, executive director of the Association for Democratic Initiatives, told SETimes. 
In BiH, analysts said that even the politicians themselves do not know who is currently wielding the power in the country. In January, the Social Democratic Party (SDP) and the Party of Democratic Action (SDA) formed a coalition, but the alliance broke up in June because of disagreements about the state budget. 
The Party of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) then stepped in and made an agreement with the SDP. 
After three SDA ministers were dismissed in July from the Council of Ministers of BiH, the breakup of the SDA-SDP coalition expanded to all cantonal governments in the Federation of BiH. 
The SDP and SDA mayors are looking for new partners to form the canton governments, but many are currently without leadership -- including Sarajevo and Livno. 
"The politicians say that all these coalitions were made [for the] welfare of the citizens. [But] the system's institutions do not function, and the democratic reforms in BiH are stopped," Tanja Topic, a political analyst at the Friedrich Ebert Foundation, told SETimes. 
Slobodan Nagradic, a professor of sociology at the University of Banja Luka, said the chaotic situation in BiH politics will continue for a long time. 
"None of the politicians are even trying to make BiH operate and function as a true state. The most important thing is who will take the chair in the government. Institutions of the state that should function regardless of the political situation in the country are trapped in politics. No one mentions any kind of reform anymore. Just chairs. Of course, the highest price, as always, will be paid by the citizens," Nagradic told SETimes. 
In Kosovo, the ruling coalition has been facing diminishing support in the assembly, mostly because of the fragility among members of PDK leader and Prime Minister Hashim Thaci's New Kosova Alliance (NKA) coalition. 
Muhamet Mustafa and Amir Ahmeti both resigned from NKA last month, leaving the parliamentary group with only six members. This reduction in the NKA -- and the frequent opposition by some MPs inside the PDK -- leaves the ruling coalition often failing to reach a majority vote. 
"This current performance convinces me that this coalition lacks legitimacy," Kosovo citizen Jeton Nezaj told SETimes. He said that the current government was primarily established to deal with the dialogue with Serbia and the dispute in the north, rather than for its citizens. 
"It is difficult to believe this governing coalition will manage to finish its mandate. We are ready to go to elections," Ismet Beqiri, leader of the opposition Democratic League of Kosovo parliamentary group, told SETimes. 
Naim Cahani, a Kosovo Democratic Institute co-ordinator, told SETimes that early elections without an appropriate electoral reform will maintain the political landscape in Kosovo. 
"Taking into consideration potential 'errors' in the electoral process which we witnessed in the previous round, the country will have no credible representation and institutions, in the way we have them now," Cahani said. 
 "The behavior of politicians is irresponsible to citizens. We didn't elect them so that they can play with the government and the state. While they are making political arrangements, the standard of living is [falling] and problems are growing," Sarajevo resident Uros Domlijan told SETimes. 
SETimes correspondents Drazen Remikovic in Sarajevo and Safet Kabashaj in Pristina contributed to this article. 
