17/07/2012
By Bojana Milovanovic and Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Belgrade and Pristina -- 17/07/12
Balkan economies are significantly impacted by economic fluctuations in the eurozone, but experts say professionals in the region as well those who emigrated to the eurozone countries are especially unable to find jobs. 
The actual numbers are sometimes disputed -- only people that officially seek employment within a narrow timeframe are counted -- yet rarely does anyone doubt professionals make up a significant percentage of the unemployed. 
Eurozone labour markets are marking a downward trend and show no signs of recovering. 
"If the current policy course does not change quickly, it is possible that a further 4.5 million jobs will be lost over the next four years," Vincenzo Splezia, senior economist of the International Institute for Labour Studies, told SETimes. 
Unemployment in the EU is close to 23% -- nearly half of those employed work on temporary contracts -- but in the Balkans it is greater than 50%, according to the EU. 
Of the 540,000 registered unemployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), experts estimate a fifth is highly educated. 
Most -- engineers, IT specialists, and others -- contemplate leaving the EU given that their professions are sought there but they face administrative and other hurdles in being hired there as well. 
"Every EU country gives an advantage to its citizens first, then to other EU country members' citizens, and then to others," Boris Pupic, representative of a Tuzla-based employment agency which is a go-between with EU employers. 
Pressed by the crushing unemployment problem, the BiH government will soon sign an agreement on labour exchange with Slovenia to ease employment of BiH citizens there. 
Close to a tenth of Serbia's workforce is highly educated, but young professionals said they have little chance of gaining experience which can lead them to employment within their profession. 
Belgrade resident Milena Stankovic, 30, who majored in Arabic, has been unable to find a job related to her field and now works as a saleswoman. 
"I thought I would have no trouble finding a job, but knowing Arabic and English have not helped me. Nevertheless, I am not losing hope, and am still applying for jobs, asking around and hoping to work in my profession," Stankovic told SETimes. 
Nearly two-thirds of the Kosovo youth up to their mid-20s are unemployed; of the 350,000 people seeking employment, 40% are qualified professionals. 
"My intention was to make some money to finance my studies, but I could work only two months because cosmetic products' sales were poor," Bleart Rafuna, 24, a student at Pristina University who took up a job at a cosmetics firm but was fired after two months, told SETimes. 
Employed elderly professionals do not fare any better since they are at the greatest risk of losing their jobs, while those in that age group without jobs say the situation is hopeless. 
Serbian economist Dragan Marinkovic, 62, had worked in the private sector since 1999 but was laid off five years ago. 
"No one will even give a chance a few years prior to retirement [age]. ... The fact that I have a university diploma and decades of experience means nothing," Marinkovic told SETimes. 
Most of the economic, political and social transactions in Kosovo -- and the Balkans -- are done in a parallel underground system, outside the official, formal system, according to Kosovo analyst Ramadan Ilazi, co-founder of the NGO Fol Movement. 
"Consequently, the professionals' capacity is not rewarded because they are perceived as a threat to this way of functioning," Ilazi told SETimes. 
