15/10/2007
By Erlis Selimaj for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 15/10/07 
Albania has become a construction site. The Balkan country is making a major push to improve its road infrastructure, after decades of isolation and a long period of transition. The former communist regime left it with a poor road and highway system. In the 17 years since democracy was restored, the infrastructure still not has been brought up to European standards. With the country aspiring to join the EU, this has to change. 
In all, Albania has roughly 18,000km of road, of which 3,636km are national roads. Over the last several years, the government has invested in national highways running east-west and north-south. According to Finance Minister Ridvan Bode, of the $800m earmarked for public investments next year, the majority will go towards improving roads. 
One of the main projects that is currently under way is the construction of the Durres-Kukes-Morine Highway. It starts in Durres -- the main Albanian port, 35km from Tirana -- and ends in Morine, more than 200km northeast of the capital. The project, which also includes a 7km-tunnel, is being implemented by the Turkish-US consortium Bechtel-Enka. 
 Currently, it takes up to six hours to reach Kukes from Durres. The new, 170km road will be a connection point with Kosovo. After it is completed, the estimated travel time will be only two hours. 
"The objective is to improve traffic flow, reduce transport costs and contribute to a reduction in the rate of accidents," transport ministry sources say. 
In September, however, the project found itself at the centre of a heated political debate, as several high officials connected to it were arrested on corruption charges. Deputy Transport Minister Nikolin Jaka, Director General of Roads Bashkim Kamberi and junior officials at the transport ministry stand accused of rigging tenders. 
Most of those arrested belong to the Christian Democratic Party, a junior member of Prime Minister Sali Berisha's ruling coalition. With prosecutors saying they also wish to question Foreign Minister Lulzim Basha -- whose former post was at the transport ministry -- the scandal could reach the highest levels of the current administration. 
The scandal hasn't halted construction, and the highway is still expected to be finished by 2009. 
Early this month, Berisha was in the United States, where he received fresh pledges of World Bank support. In particular, the Bank has promised to back an upcoming secondary roads scheme, as well as the Durres-Morine Highway. 
"We see this project [Durres-Morine] as very important both for Albania and Kosovo," the World Bank Director of the Southeast Europe Country Unit, Orsalia Kalantzopoulos, said. 
Another priority item is Albania's section of Corridor 8, one of ten Trans-European Corridors intended to facilitate the exchange of goods, people, oil and other energy supplies among the EU, the Balkan states and central Asia. In addition to promoting economic and commercial development, it is hoped that these Corridors will help improve stability in a region that has long been troubled. 
Corridor 8 connects the Adriatic and Black seas. It starts at the Italian ports of Bari and Brindisi and ends in Burgas and Varna in Bulgaria. Along the way, it passes through Durres, Tirana, Skopje and Sofia. Three sections are now under construction in Albania -- Librazhd-Qafe Thane, Lushnje-Fier and Levan-Vlore. 
The government is also intent on moving ahead with a north-south highway. Sometimes referred to as the Adriatic-Ionian highway, it will form part of a larger regional highway connecting Croatia with Greece, via the coast. Albania is constructing three segments: Levan-Tepelene, Tepelene-Gjirokaster and Shkoder-Han i Hotit. 
"These are the segments which will get the main funds from the budget. With a new strategy we aim to speed up the investment's rhythm for the period 2007-2008," Bode said. 
Officials say the major projects -- Durres-Morine, Corridor 8 and the Adriatic-Ionian -- should be largely complete by 2010. At that point, Albania will have an estimated 759km of highway linking it with its neighbours. 
Besides the World Bank, international donors involved in the rehabilitation of Albania's road network include the EU, the EBRD, the Central European Initiative, the Italian, American, Albanian and Greek governments, the European Investment Bank and the Bank of Kuwait. 
Roads are not the only major infrastructural issue Albania has to deal with. Albanians would like to see it become a tourist destination and capitalize on its potential as one of the undiscovered countries of Europe. However, this requires an upgrade in facilities. Electricity is shifty and hotels are in short supply. 
Visitors to the country do, at least, receive an impressive welcome. A completely redesigned Tirana International Airport was finished in March. The new terminal, with its sophisticated architectural design, has the capacity to process more than a million passengers annually. The terminal not only sets a new standard in terms of performance and functionality, but also in terms of architecture in Albania, and represents a special contribution to the urban renewal of the city. 
Kukes airport is expected to open in early 2008, making it the second civilian airport in Albania. Earlier this year the Italian government promised that it would help rebuild the airport in Gjirkoastra. The airport will function in both a civilian and military capacity. 
Currently, there are two feasibility studies being conducted for airports in Vlora and Korca. A plan for an airport at Saranda has been completed, but so far there is no known investor willing to put in money. 
According to Toronto's Globe and Mail, Albania currently accounts for only 0.1% of tourism in Europe. It may be years before the country can significantly improve that figure, though the needed steps are finally being taken. Meanwhile, those who do come are getting a glimpse of treasures that someday may be more widely known. 
