12/07/2005
By Jelena Tusup for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 12/07/05
On the 10th anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre, Serbs still have an ambiguous view of Europe's worst atrocity since World War II. Most people interviewed by TV crews agreed that an apology was needed, but said all sides in the conflict were to blame and should express remorse. Some tried to minimise Srebrenica's significance by drawing comparisons with other incidents in which Serbs were the victims. A few -- mostly older men -- were defiant. "They should be apologising to us," said one. 
The media also was divided. Some TV stations, such as B92 and Studio B, broadcast live coverage of Monday's anniversary ceremony, but Serbian national TV did not. All stations, however, dedicated the first half of their prime time information shows to the anniversary. Newspapers provided extensive coverage of Serbian President Boris Tadic's visit to Potocari, as well as commentary and reminiscences concerning events in Srebrenica in July 1995. 
 The Serbian Parliament observed a minute of silence for the victims of Srebrenica, Bratunac and Skelane, as well as those who died in last week's London bombings. But only the representatives of the ruling coalition were present. MPs from the Democratic and Radical parties were not told of the commemorative action and thus were left out. What could have been a profound occasion instead became another source of political bickering. 
The clearest message came from Tadic, who attended the Potocari ceremony. Prior to his departure, he said his visit was meant to show respect for the victims. 
"We did not stand behind these war crimes. We need to show the distance between the war crimes and the citizens; the future of Serbia depends on it. [Another reason] for going to Srebrenica is the necessity to create complete trust and co-operation between the countries of this region. Many war crimes were committed against the Serbian people as well, and justice for those involved is expected. However it takes virtue and strength to condemn war crimes that were committed against another nation in the name of our nation," Tadic said. 
Two incidents perhaps best demonstrate the divided atmosphere in Serbia on the subject of war crimes. On Sunday, 100 members of the "Women in Black" organisation attempted to hold a commemoration in Belgrade for the Srebrenica victims. They were met by a group of young people who shouted threats and attacked them with tear gas. 
In Novi Sad, meanwhile, organisers of the Exit Festival had planned to broadcast a message of peace at midnight on Sunday. The Annie Lennox song "I Saved the World Today" was to have been played, followed by a message: "Ten years after, let us promise to our children, and their children, that Srebrenica, Bratunac, Vukovar, Oluja, Ahmici, Djakovica, Staro Gacko won't be repeated. Ever again." At the last minute, however, organisers scrapped that part of the programme, after local police warned of a bomb threat. 
