19/03/2012
By Alina Radu for Southeast European Times in Chisinau -- 19/03/12
Moldova began five-day negotiations on a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Agreement (DCFTA) with the EU on Sunday (March 18th). The DCFTA is expected to be signed in 2013, and will bring benefits to the country, along with major challenges. 
 Late last month, Prime Minister Vladimir Filat met with EU Trade Commissioner Karel De Gucht in Chisinau to discuss the arrangement. 
Both parties noted the significant growth in bilateral trade between Moldova and the EU states -- which has reached 2.7 billion euros -- and pointed out that exports from Moldova to EU states make up 49% of the country's exports. 
"It is a surprising growth of Moldovan exports, and also it is interesting to see that Moldova doesn't go to Europe only with wine or vegetables, being known for its agricultural economy. Last year Moldova entered European market with industry and manufacturing. And it is very good, because Moldova may offer a good quality for a good price, having here a relatively cheap working force market," Moldova's Economy Minister Valeriu Lazar told SETimes. 
MP Veaceslav Ionita -- head of the Parliamentary Commission for Economy, Budget and Finances -- said the DCFTA is a great benefit for Moldova. 
 "It brings … easier circulation of goods, money, people and services. All four will circulate easier, and life will be better," Ionita told SETimes. 
 Nicu Popescu, a senior Policy Fellow at European Council for Foreign Relations (ECFR) in the UK, is a former advisor to Filat on EU integration issues. He is still following the relation of Moldova and other eastern countries with EU. 
"The challenges for Moldova will be not just to negotiate DCFTA, but to implement its provisions. Moldova's institutional capacity is relatively low, and it will take time to implement the necessary standards," Popescu told SETimes. 
Lazar agreed that there are many challenges but all of them can be solved. 
"Moldova has 1.5 years ahead to implement all DCFTA regulations. It is a short period of time for a huge amount of work, but it is also an opportunity to bring EU standards and quality to Moldovan products, goods and services," he told SETimes. 
He said that it is important to show the openness and the desire, and second, a plan of action needs to be made. 
"We have so much to do in the area of quality of products, of standards. And it is very clear that we have to achieve a better quality management. But when we show, step by step, our efforts and successes, I think we may renegotiate some terms with our EU partners and the dialogue is to start now and continue for ten to15 years," Lazar said. 
 Iurie Gotisan is a project co-ordinator at the Expert Group -- an independent think tank that delivers analytical services and promotes innovative models for economic and social policies in Moldova. He told SETimes that although the process could be long, he has no doubts about the benefits for Moldova. 
 "The DCFTA brings opportunities to three categories in Moldovan society: exporters, importers and consumers. It is very important to have unlimited access without tariff restrictions for all Moldovan goods on EU market, as well as for all EU goods on our market. But for that we have to care a lot about quality," Gotisan told SETimes. 
De Gucht noted as well how important for Moldova is to enhance all the requirements of quality and safety. According to him, the EU will continue rendering Moldova assistance to solve this and other problems. 
"Compared to all the other eastern partners, Moldova is the most enthusiastic supporter of a DCFTA with the EU. This is not just because the support for EU integration is higher, but also because Moldova is the one post-soviet state that has the highest share of external trade, up to 50%, with the EU," Popescu added. 
Over the past few years, Moldovan export figures show a huge increase on the EU market, with Romania as a main exporting market, and a decrease of exporting goods and products to CIS member-countries. 
