15/06/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 15/06/11 
Sparked by Serbs' feelings that political parties are one of the biggest generators of corruption in the country, the EU has demanded that the country set the manner for financing political activities. 
As the result, on Tuesday (June 14th), the Serbian parliament adopted a law on financing political parties, which will make the activities and financing transparent and allow the public a look into their financial sources. 
"The law also envisages clear penalties for those who fail to abide by the regulations," State Administration Minister Milan Markovic said, adding that all financial contributions to parties would nowbe publicized and carried out exclusively through bank accounts. 
The public will be able to see who, aside from the state, finances parties and how much money they get from private sources. This means that parties in Serbia will be punished for omissions in financial operations for the first time. 
Anti-Corruption Agency Chairwoman Zorana Markovic said the new regulations on financing political activities were necessary, because the public believed there was a lot of corruption in that area. 
"I think we can be satisfied, because at this moment we have good legal grounds for more transparent actions in the field. I hope that we will very soon clear up the issue of financing political parties and tone it down to a realistic measure," Markovic said. 
According to the new law, illegal acquisition of funding can carry the penalty of between three months and three years in prison. The same sentence will apply those who jeopardize the financiers of political parties in any way. 
Zlata Djordjevic, a member of the Anti-Corruption Agency committee, told SETimes that it is important that the new law allow the agency to control parties' financial reports and to hire auditors if it doubts the validity of party documents. 
"Control of party operations can prove to be crucial in suppressing corruption on the political scene," she said. 
The law will also prevent the appearance of phantom parties in elections, ie, those that exist only to take money from the budget for election campaigning, Djordjevic said. 
"All parties that plan to take part in elections must pay a certain guarantee, which is poured back into the state budget if a party fails to win one percent of valid votes in an election," she said. 
Transparency Serbia representative Nemanja Nenadic told SETimes that the law is not "a magic wand that can solve everything at once". 
"Everything depends on independent state bodies and their control, but the fact is that they now have more instruments of control. Up till now there has been no verified data on who is financing a certain party," he said. 
Not everyone involved in Serbia's political life is happy with the new law, although all MPs said the financing of parties should be controlled. 
Miroslav Petkovic, vice-president of the opposition Democratic Party of Serbia, told SETimes that according to the new law, more money would be earmarked for parties from the budget, which was unacceptable in the economic crisis. 
"The law is not good because it does not sanction potential abuse of state resources in the financing of parties -- there is no control of possible concealed drawing of public companies' funds for certain parties," he said. 
