16/12/2008
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 16/12/08
Romania's new prime minister-designate, Emil Boc, assured the country late Monday (December 15th) that the planned governing coalition is still in place. The surprise decision by Theodor Stolojan to give up his nomination for the prime minister's post would not affect the alliance between the Liberal Democratic Party (PDL) and the Social Democrats (PSD), Boc said. 
 "We are moving on with the PDL-PSD government. We'll do our job," said Boc, who is leader of the PDL and also serves as mayor of Cluj-Napoca, one of the largest cities in Romania. 
He also said he would put together a consulting group consisting of experts from the National Bank of Romania, the Romanian Academy and civil society that will support him during his term in office. 
Stolojan shocked the country Monday with his announcement that he was giving up the mandate to lead Romania's next government. For the last four years, he had been considered a likely candidate for the post. A veteran politician who played a key role in the transition from communism, Stolojan was widely seen as one of the best choices for steering the country through the current global economic crisis. 
"Through this gesture, I want to give hopes to the new generation of politicians," the PDL deputy leader explained. 
His move, though surprising, was not without precedent. In 2004, he quit the presidential race to make room for the current head of state, Traian Basescu. 
During a press conference called after Stolojan's announcement Monday, the president appeared visibly upset by the developments, acknowledging he is a "little sad" about the withdrawal. No one in the PDL matched Stolojan's experience and credibility, Basescu said. 
Social Democratic leader Mircea Geoana said he was surprised by the move. The decision, he said, puts questions on the table that will need to be cleared up in further talks between the coalition partners. 
He added, however, that the top priority is to form the government. 
"We'll stick to the announced calendar," Geoana said. "The most important thing is to give Romania a stable government as soon as possible." 
Meanwhile, media speculation is running wild about the reasons for Stolojan's move. Some analysts say he was unhappy that members of his former National Liberal Party (PNL) would not get the same number of cabinet portfolios as the PDL members. Stolojan left the PNL in 2006 to form the Liberal Democratic Party, which later merged with Basescu's Democratic Party to form the current PDL. 
The former Democrats reportedly rejected his request on the grounds that they were the ones who attracted the most votes in the November 30th parliamentary elections. 
Other analysts suggest he was unhappy with some elements of the coalition deal and the way some ministers were chosen, without consulting him. All sources agree he made the decision Sunday night after a meeting of the coalition parties at which leaders discussed the distribution of ministries. 
