06/05/2009
(AFP - 06/05/09; AP, Reuters, DPA, AKI, New York Times, BBC, Beta, B92, International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia - 05/05/09)
The Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) ruled on Tuesday (May 5th) that a former Serbian army officer effectively enabled the 1991 massacre of 194 Croatian prisoners of war and more than tripled his initial sentence. 
In September 2007, the UN court convicted former Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) Major Veselin Sljivancanin, 55, of aiding and abetting the torture of the prisoners seized from a hospital in the city of Vukovar but cleared him of responsibility for their eventual execution. 
Dismissing his appeal and quashing his acquittal, the Appeals Chamber decided on Tuesday to increase his prison term to 17 years. 
"A five years' imprisonment sentence does not adequately reflect the level of gravity of the crimes committed by Mr Sljivancanin," presiding Judge Theodor Meron said, announcing the five-member panel's 3-2 majority decision. 
The appellate judges also dismissed the appeal of former JNA Colonel Mile Mrksic, 61, upholding the 20-year prison sentence he received for his role in the Vukovar massacre. 
Miroslav Radic, the third former Serb officer indicted in the case, was acquitted in 2007 on all counts. 
According to the joint indictment, Mrksic was the commander of the JNA's 1st Guards Motorised Brigade, which bore prime responsibility for the three-month siege of Vukovar that led to its eventual fall in November 1991. At the time, Sljivancanin was a security officer of that brigade. 
Pursuant to an agreement between the JNA and the Croatian government, troops under Mrksic and Sljivancanin's command removed about 400 patients and refugees from the Vukovar hospital on the morning of November 20th 1991. They moved about 300 of the hospital's charges to the nearby Ovcara farm, subjecting them to beatings and other abuse. 
Mrksic then ordered the withdrawal of the regular Serb troops who were protecting the prisoners, leaving them in the hands of local territorial defence forces and paramilitaries. Those units shot the prisoners to death in a nearby ravine. 
UN prosecutors placed the number of those murdered in the incident at 264, but the 2007 court put the number of provable murders at 194. 
The Appeals Chamber said that Sljivancanin should have disobeyed Mrksic's illegal orders, although the colonel was his superior. It decided Sljivancanin was aware the paramilitaries "would likely kill the prisoners of war" in the absence of regular Serb forces, as Meron stated in the courtroom. 
The UN court's sentences in 2007 prompted angry reactions in Croatia. 
"I don't know how many people should have been killed here for the perpetrators to get life sentences," Prime Minister Ivo Sanader said at the time, while appealing for calm. 
