13/04/2006
(Blic, Dnevnik.bg, Nine o'Clock, Bucharest Daily News - 13/04/06; Reuters, AP, BBC, VOA, Euronews, Radio B92, Sofia News Agency, Mediapool - 12/04/06)
Emergency measures have been introduced in parts of Serbia, Romania and Bulgaria, as the Danube River reached its highest levels in decades Wednesday (12 April). Continuing rains are expected to further raise the level of Europe's second-longest river on Thursday and Friday. 
In Serbia, the situation was said to be worst in the northern province of Vojvodina, which was first hit by floods, as the Danube and its tributary Tisa submerged hundreds of hectares of farmland and forced hundreds of people to flee their homes. Thousands of army troops have been sent to the region to help reinforce embankments with sandbags. 
"The situation is very serious," Serbian Agriculture Minister Ivana Dulic-Markovic said on Wednesday. "The Tisa reached levels unseen here in 100 years." 
An official of the Vojvodina water management board expected the situation to remain "dramatic" for several more days. 
Serbian authorities have introduced emergency measures in areas along the Danube and two other of its tributaries, the Sava and Tamish rivers, which are also said to be overflowing. 
Low-lying parts of Belgrade were also flooded Wednesday, when the levels of the Danube and Sava rose 20cm above record highs set in 1981. The most critical zones in the city have been sandbagged and troops have been called in to help with the protective measures. 
In Romania and Bulgaria, authorities were also taking emergency measures Wednesday, as the Danube swamped parts of the two countries. Neither has fully recovered from record floods last year, which claimed a number of lives and caused damage worth millions of euros. 
In Romania's Tulcea county, seven of the over 70 houses affected by the floods Wednesday were completely destroyed. More than 50 people, according to Reuters, were evacuated from the Danube delta village of Smardan. Some 4,200 hectares of farmland were underwater. 
In the county of Braila, where the Danube is 30cm above its normal level, the authorities were also taking protective measures, reinforcing Noianul-Chiscani dam with sandbags. About 100 people had to be evacuated at Calafat, after the dam that separates the Danube from the city's main sewer burst, the Romanian English-language daily Nine o' Clock reported on Thursday. Flooding also has triggered landslides near the Dunarea municipality, causing traffic problems on the Cernavoda-Harsova road. 
Experts in Bulgaria warned that the highest tidal wave would reach the country Thursday. They said the Danube would likely exceed 960cm at the northwestern port of Vidin, 30cm above the critical level. This would beat a record high set in 1942 when the Danube flooded the city. 
On Wednesday, the authorities evacuated patients from an orphanage and the first floor of Vidin's hospital. Mayor Ivan Tsenov recommended that mothers with small children leave the city. Schools and kindergartens have been closed and the local administration said it is prepared to begin evacuating people if the need arises. 
In the port of Lom, the swollen river swamped the town's park, storehouses near the port, the port administration building, the customs facility and a local square, the Sofia News Agency reported on Thursday. 
