18/11/2009
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 18/11/09
Preliminary results from Kosovo's municipal elections have been delayed due to what officials are calling "technical difficulties". Despite that, international and local monitors say Sunday's (November 15th) vote was generally satisfactory and that the process met international standards. 
A delegation led by German member of the European Parliament, Doris Pack, said on Monday that the elections were an important phase of Kosovo's democratic transition, illustrating the advancement of rights and responsibilities of all communities through the ongoing process of decentralisation in a multi-ethnic society. 
 "With some imperfections, the election process to date took place in an overall peaceful and good natured atmosphere with considerable voter participation," said Pack. 
She also welcomed Serb participation in the elections, saying that Kosovo Serbs are realising that their future depends on them. 
"Maybe it can convince some states to see this country positively, and to recognise Kosovo," Pack said. 
US Ambassador to Pristina Christopher Dell added "Kosovo and its citizens can be very proud today. Kosovo's voters, its politicians, and the officials charged with organising and managing the elections demonstrated to the world that an independent Kosovo is a place where democracy can and does flourish." 
Dell also commended the decision of many Kosovo Serbs to participate in the elections, despite calls from Belgrade to boycottnthe vote. "You rightly recognised that the elections provided you with a unique opportunity to shape your future and the future of your communities," he said. 
Partial results, released by the Kosovo Central Election Commission on Monday evening, sugguest that the Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) was victorious in most municipalities, followed by the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK). Most of the municipalities will go to a second round of voting on December 13th. 
The international observation mission, ENEMO, led by Darko Aleksov, released its preliminary report Monday, saying the voting process was assessed positively at 93% of polling stations in the country. 
However, the mission underlined a number of shortcomings, such as lack of voter secrecy and the perceived lack of education related to new voting techniques. 
"It is also of concern that none of the cases of criminal offences from 2007 elections that the Election Complaints and Appeals Commission, ECAC, has forwarded to the appropriate courts has been prosecuted," the mission said, noting that Kosovo authorities did not release funding for the ECAC in due time. 
"Only after intervention and support from international organisations, the ECAC was able to be operational the last weeks before election day," ENEMO said. 
