10/08/2009
By Ciprian Cochilet for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 10/08/09
The Romanian Federation of Journalists MediaSind, which formed five years ago through the unification of four media unions, represents more than 8,000 employees. The organisation has had a fundamental role in promoting freedom of speech in the country, and mediating between workers and employers. In 2004, the first collective labour contract regulating salary levels and working conditions for the media was signed, in which MediaSind played a crucial role. 
 A year later, MediaSind joined the largest journalist organisation in the world, the International Journalists' Federation. 
MediaSind's role is not easy amid the economic crisis, which has taken a major toll on Romanian media. The federation responded promptly to arbitrary and illegal layoffs and came up with concrete proposals meant to help the sector surmount the difficult time. 
Cristi Godinac, Mediasind's president and founder, spoke to SETimes about the challenges brought on by the economic crisis, and how the union is going to tackle them. 
 SETimes: We know Romanian media have been hit hard by the economic crisis. Can you estimate how many journalists have been laid off? Are there signs layoffs will continue? 
 Cristi Godinac: Unfortunately, the Romanian government has refused to adopt some fiscal measures meant to diminish the effects of the economic crisis and support the media industry. 
Consequently, the majority of the media institutions had to resort to layoffs. They motivate this through the economic crisis, the necessity of internal reorganisation. Our data shows that around 1,000 employees have been laid off so far. Among the media trusts that had to lay off people are MediaPro, Ringier, Gardianul, Intact, Adevarul, Romania Libera, as well as many press institutions in the rest of the country. And things don't seem to stop here. There is information there'll be more waves of layoffs in the media, so the above-mentioned figure could double by the end of the year. 
 SETimes: What happens to those who lose their jobs? Do they seek to find another in the same field, or do they look elsewhere? 
 Godinac: Though many of those laid off are journalists with years of experience, some of them couldn't find a job in the press and several chose to start their own blogs in an attempt to turn this into a source of profit. 
 SETimes: Do you believe the layoffs will alter the quality of journalism? 
 Godinac: Unfortunately, few employers are aware that human resources are the most important source of income. Even if the advertising market has considerably decreased, a journalistic product can be easily sold if it's created by valuable people. If employers ignore the quality and the work conditions, preferring to reduce the labor force instead of cutting other expenses, then be sure many media institutions will go bankrupt and the quality of journalism will suffer. 
 SETimes: Do you think journalism is inevitably heading online? 
 Godinac: The technological progress will inevitably generate an unprecedented development of the online sector. The economic crisis can only accelerate this outcome. Day by day, we notice more and more publications reduce their circulation and pay an ever greater attention to this segment. For now, the income generated by advertising in the online sector is very small compared to the print one. The struggles for online advertising and the new generation of consumers that allocate less time to newspapers and television have caused panic in the media industry. 
 SETimes: How is the Romanian journalism community supporting the development and extension of the online sector? 
 Godinac: This is the main issue we need to settle. The future journalists, regardless of whether they work in the print, online, audiovisual industry, have to observe the rules of the branch deontology. Even if in five, ten or 15 years most publications will switch to online, the rules of journalism must be observed: the deontological code, the journalist's status, the copyrights, the collective labor contract, etc. 
Unfortunately, nowadays, the online segment is regulated by few rules. FRJ MediaSind, along with professional and employers' organisations in the field, has to adapt the current rules for those working in the written press and for those in the online sector. For instance, the foundation of a society to administer the collective copyrights of journalists would be a welcome idea. At the same time, the rights of the journalists in the online field must be granted and observed by employers. 
 SETimes: How do you see the future of both the Romanian media and FRJ MediaSind? 
 Godinac: [This was] discussed at the General Assembly of the European Federation of Journalists that took place in Varna, Bulgaria, [in May]. The main conclusions were that the dramatic reorganisation of the media [is raising] serious problems for those involved in this industry. 
While blogs and internet networks have become stars, the traditional media, mainly newspapers, are about to disappear. Unfortunately, the economic crisis has also had an impact on the manner in which topics related to the social and political sphere are reflected and on democracy. … The reorganisation of the media market is inevitable and has the potential to create a more open community, more connected and informed, provided that it protects the public and professional purposes of journalism -- to educate, stimulate and inform, to spark public debates and hold responsible those who hold the power in society. 
Journalism is the surveillance mechanism against corruption and maintains democracy in the world. As a response to this phenomenon, the European Federation of Journalists thinks that the future of media has to be brought to the core of the debates nationally and internationally, where the central discussion should be the crucial role of journalism in building democracy based on stability, social justice and correctness. 
Regardless of the communication medium, the solution to the problems the Romanian media are facing is the enhancement of professionalism in journalism. And that's the very objective of FRJ MediaSind. 
