20/09/2011
By Muhamet Brajshori for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 20/09/11
Since 1999, nine banks have been operating in Kosovo, offering high loan rates that negatively impact the country's economic development. This prompted the Kosovo Competition Commission (KCC) to investigate whether the banks have a mutual agreement, or cartel, which keeps rates higher. 
"Kosovo banks are being investigated under the suspicion that they made cartel-type arrangements. If we manage to figure out the facts, penalties under the Competition Law may be up to 10% of the annual gross-profit," Osman Ejupi, head of KCC told Zeri. 
Most of the banking system is driven by the Raiffeisen Bank and ProCredit Bank, which charge higher rates in Kosovo than they do in their home countries. 
"Banks in the country have very similar interest rates, and, at the same time, have higher interest rates from those in the region," Ejupi explained. 
The Pristina-based think tank, Institute for Advanced Studies (GAP Institute), conducted a three-year study of the Kosovo banking system published in Bank Watch, which included comparative data on the most popular loan types -- personal, business, house, agriculture, and car -- offered by commercial banks, including a table of comparative data on interest deposits. 
Many businesses depend on bank loans, though high interest rates do not create favourable conditions for business development, experts argue. 
"The changes in loan rates from 2009 to 2011 consistently range from 9% to 24%, depending on the type of loans. Personal loans, car-credit or credit to purchase homes have lower interest rates compared to rates for businesses and agro-credit, which simultaneously constitute 70% of total loans issued in Kosovo in the last three years," the GAP Institute's Rudina Heroi-Puka told SETimes. 
She argues that low interest rates would boost Kosovo's economic development and financial stability. 
"Low interest rates have a positive impact on credit demand, which affects further improvement of economy through increased investment and consumption," says Heroi Puka. 
Lumir Abdixhiku, executive director of Riinvest Institute, told SETimes "There is no co-ordination among the banks, where they would agree on fixed interest rates. Instead, the banks are comfortably profiting; each gets a share and has no motivation to compete with one another. This status quo is dictated by competitive two to three oligopolistic, market-leading banks in the country," he says. 
Abdixhiku added that the government needs to take steps that would enable a change in the banking system, while strengthening financial stability. 
"Approval of the law on letters with values that would allow issuing treasury bonds is the first step in this direction. Secondly, to reduce the risk of lending, I would say that the functionality of the court is a prerequisite. Finally, the cadastral registration would allow property mortgage seriously to increase the demand for credit, and lower the interest rates," says Abdixhiku. 
According to the Bank Watch report, the financial crisis in Kosovo prompted banks to be more cautious in issuing loans last year, yet still did some damage. 
"The global financial crisis adversely affected the Kosovo economy and the quality of bank loan portfolios. Thus, non-performing loans represented 5.9% of total loans, compared with 4.4% in 2009 and 3% in 2008. Banks view the growth of non-performing loans as risky, which also resulted in increased interest rates in early 2011," said Heroi-Puka. 
