23/02/2006
(Independent, Reuters, BBC - 23/02/06; AFP, Bloomberg, FT, DPA, EurActiv, EUROPA -22/02/06)
The European Commission (EC) allowed France and the Netherlands on Wednesday (22 February) to vaccinate millions of their chickens, ducks and geese. 
The decision, reached after three days of talks, sets a number of strict conditions. 
"The vaccination programmes are authorised only for specific birds in specified regions, and will be subject to rigorous surveillance and control requirements," the EC said in a statement. "These include movement restrictions, strict monitoring of vaccinated flocks to ensure that there is no undetected outbreak of avian influenza, and careful record-keeping. Vaccinated poultry must also be able to be differentiated from poultry and birds with the avian influenza virus." 
Conditions and limits have also been laid out in respect to the trade of the vaccinated birds and their products. 
France, the EU's biggest poultry producer, is planning to vaccinate around 900,000 ducks and geese in three departments -- Landes, Vendee and Loire-Atlantique. The country, which reported its first case of H5N1 infection in a wild duck last week, has confirmed that a second wild duck on its territory has been found to have that lethal form of avian influenza. 
The Dutch vaccination plan applies to up to 3 million hobby poultry and to around 5 million free-range laying hens throughout the country. 
Both countries have ordered most poultry to be kept indoors to prevent bird flu spreading from wild birds to domestic fowl. Besides France, the highly pathogenic H5N1 strain of bird flu has already been confirmed in six other EU countries -- Austria, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy and Slovenia. Slovakia is testing its first possible H5N1 cases in a wild falcon and a grebe. 
"Recent cases of avian flu in wild birds in the EU have compounded the need to explore every possible option to protect our poultry from this virus," EU Health and Consumer Protection Commissioner Markos Kyprianou said on Wednesday. 
All cases of H5N1 infection detected in EU countries involved wild birds. However, a report by Bloomberg news agency Wednesday indicated that the deadly form of avian flu might have hit domesticated birds in Austria. Final tests are under way on two chickens from an animal shelter that have tested positive for H5N1. 
Meanwhile, the number of H5N1 cases in Germany has exceeded 100 and has prompted authorities to place the coastline of the northern state of Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania under observation. According to the BBC, the country is testing chickens in Ruegen, in northern Germany. But EU officials were split on whether to allow France and the Netherlands to proceed with the vaccinations, as this could affect exports. While inoculation can protect poultry, the birds could remain carriers of the virus without showing symptoms. Furthermore, if the vaccination has been improperly administered, the virus would be undetectable in inoculated birds, allowing it to spread among other birds in the flock. In turn, non-EU countries could move to ban imports from the bloc, which is the world's third-biggest poultry exporter after the United States and Brazil. 
Vaccinations could also make it easier for bird flu to mutate and become easily transmissible among humans, thus creating the conditions for a pandemic that could kill millions of people. 
The H5N1 avian flu virus has killed at least 92 people since 2003, mostly in Asia, but there has been no evidence so far of the virus being spread from person to person. 
EU health ministers and experts from the WHO and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control are due to meet in Vienna on Friday to discuss further efforts to control bird flu outbreaks. 
