03/08/2011
By Jonilda Koci for Southeast European Times in Tirana – 03/08/11 
Though the building has served various cultural and commercial purposes since 1990, the so-called pyramid, officially the International Centre of Culture in Tirana, is to be replaced by a new parliamentary complex for the 100th anniversary of Albania's independence. 
Those calling for its replacement are apprehensive of its one-time role as a museum honouring the late Stalinist dictator Enver Hoxha. 
"We cannot keep in place a building that holds the ghost of the dictator," Democratic Party MP Enkelejd Alibeaj said. 
The initiative raised heated discussions, and thousands of citizens signed petitions asking authorities to stop any demolition. 
"The pyramid is not the property of Enver Hoxha ... All Albanians have worked for this pyramid, myself included," Maks Velo, a well-known Albanian architect said. 
Over the last 20 years, the pyramid has served a number of purposes -- several commercial and book fairs are held there, and private national TV station Top Channel has offices and studios there.
Several of the country's architects have stated their firm opposition to the pyramid's destruction, not because it is a cultural heritage, but because they say the structure can be quite easily adapted into a parliamentary complex. One of the architects agrees, and has initiated a number of projects to follow up. 
"I cannot believe that an object of such huge monetary and historic value can be destroyed. It is one of the most prominent buildings in Albania," architect Vladimir Bregu said. 
Activists supporting the pyramid are young people, who do not remember it being used as a museum for Hoxha. 
Mjaft movement activist Aldo Merkoci told SETimes that the pyramid has served as the only public place where citizens, especially the young, have cultivated interest in art, culture and music. "For the young people, destroying the pyramid means losing a very important public space." 
"This is a bill of incompetence and corruption of the public administration and the Albanian government," publisher Ardian Klosi told SETimes. 
"It is not that we have one political wing saying the pyramid should not be destroyed and the other part saying it should be destroyed. It is an issue of citizens asking: Can you hear our voice?" Artan Lame, former deputy mayor of Tirana, told SETimes. 
