15/04/2008
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 15/04/08
Of the 144 municipalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), 114 can be characterised as rural -- areas where almost 61% of the population resides. "These indicators sufficiently suggest that BiH must take a strategic and political decision to place agricultural development among its top priorities. Unless we do it, we cannot expect better days for BiH agriculture," Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry Minister Damir Ljubic said. 
 Ljubic, presenting the 2007 Agriculture Sector report for BiH in Sarajevo last month, noted that, at this point, rural development is not among the three core priorities in BiH. 
The report -- developed by the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations (MoFTER) -- contains an overview of activities in the agriculture sector, including main trends in 2005 and 2006 and projections and policy priorities for 2008. 
 MoFTER is currently the only state-level authority in charge of agriculture, in co-operation with representatives of the entity-level agricultural ministries and departments and with experts provided by the European Commission's SESMARD Project. 
According to BiH Deputy Minister of Foreign Trade and Economic Relations Vilim Primorac, agriculture enjoyed permanent growth over the past five years and its deficit has been visibly shrinking over the past two years. 
"We believe that this year will be a turning point, because BiH is poised to join the World Trade Organisation; it already signed CEFTA, and hopefully it also will sign the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU. We will be facing an opening market of some 6 million people, where BiH exporters will have numerous opportunities. However, we now must make our farmers more efficient and able to cope with competition," Primorac said. 
BiH is primarily an agricultural country, with 15% of its land under cultivation, mainly by the private sector. The richest soils are in the north along the Sava River valley. In more hilly areas, land is used for both cultivation and grazing. Principal crops are wheat, corn, barley, soybeans and potatoes. In Herzegovina and in the more sheltered areas of Bosnia, tobacco is grown. Sheep are the principal livestock, although cattle and pigs also are raised. 
During the 1992–1995 conflict in the country, about 10% of the agriculture sector was damaged. One of the main hurdles to reconstruction is the continuing abundance of land mines and other unexploded ordnance throughout the country. A World Bank assessment suggests that mine removal may cost as much as 10 billion euros. 
