20/02/2012
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 20/02/12
Serbia is taking what environmentalists say is a significant step towards protecting natural resources by approving restrictions on plastic bags in favour of biodegradable products, which will take less time to decompose and pose less of a threat to the environment. 
The project by the ministry of environment is novel in the country. In 2010, the city of Vranje intended to require paper bags instead of plastic, but the measure was never enforced. 
About a fourth of European states have banned plastic bags, while others, including Belgium, Ireland and Croatia, have taxed them. Macedonia banned plastic bags in 2009. 
In early February, the EU launched a nine-month test programme to determine if plastic bags should be banned in the Union. 
It is estimated that each Serbian citizen uses at least 250 plastic bags annually -- at least one with every store purchase. Most end up on the waste site as garbage bags. Some end up in trees, streets or the water. 
Officials at the environment ministry say the new act cannot force an immediate end to plastic bag use; rather it can sanction those who would use bags in the future, and over time completely stop their use. 
"This act is part of the National Environmental Strategy adopted in 2007 with an aim to reform existing environmental policy: reduction of air, water and soil pollution, recycling, ecological waste management, and a rise in environmental awareness," Bojan Djuric, state secretary of the environment ministry told SETimes. 
"Manufacturers and importers of plastic bags will have to pay a fee of about 220 euros per tonne. The producers of plastic bags that contain biodegradable additives will pay about 10 euros per tonne, but for those producing fully biodegradable bags there will be no charge," Djuric said. 
The government will subsidise the production of compostable and biodegradable bags with about 70 euro per tonne. 
According to Djuric, the taxes will discourage plastic bag producers, but will not force them to change the production technology or buy new equipment in order to start producing ecological bags. 
Novi Sad Technology University will test bags available on the market, their composition and quantity of additives that enables decomposition. 
"If the additive is appropriate, then the basic synthetic product, polyethylene or polypropylene, becomes quickly degradable, and absorbable in nature, and when thrown away, becomes a food for micro-organisms," Vera Lazic, head of the university's laboratory, told SETimes. 
Some Serbian residents support the new programme. 
"This is a good idea, but the state should try to do more, not only about plastic bags, but plastic in general. Also, it's not enough to pass a law on banning plastic items, the state should do more in rising ecological awareness. I think that now, the awareness is very low," Dusan Puresic, a Sabac resident says. 
Dobrica Veselinovic, Belgrade NGO activist and one of the founders of the online initiative for plastic bags ban ECO-LOG, told SETimes he is offered a plastic bag with a purchase nearly every day. 
"The food market is the worst in this case since they give out plastic bags for each purchased product. It was about time the state decided to do something," Veselinovic said. 
