07/06/2004
(AP, FT, AFP, Telegraph, The Guardian, Reuters - 07/06/04; Washington Post, CNN, BBC, AP, Rompres, Novinite, BNN, Mediapool - 06/06/04)
Expressing sadness over the death of former US President Ronald Reagan, leaders from Eastern Europe and the ex-Soviet Union have praised him for helping bring down communism and changing the world.
"I take the death of Ronald Reagan very hard," Mikhail Gorbachev, the last Soviet leader, told reporters Sunday (6 June). "He was a man whom fate set by me in perhaps the most difficult years at the end of the 20th century. It was his goal and his dream to end his term and enter history as a peacemaker."
Reagan, 93, died of pneumonia, as a complication of Alzheimer's, at his Bel Air home on Saturday. He took office in 1981 at the age of 69, becoming the oldest elected US president. When he stepped down at the end of his second term in 1989, most of the Eastern European countries had already thrown off communism and the repressive regimes that ruled there.
Reagan's presidency was marked by his intent to loosen the grip of the Soviet Union over the countries in the communist bloc through intense diplomatic efforts and a military build-up that drew Moscow into a tougher arms race than it could afford. He also invested millions in initiatives promoting freedom and democracy in the region.
"He was a president that marked an era of history. It was during Reagan's term in office that one witnessed this opening of the dialogue with Gorbachev. He is the man to go down in history as the president of America who took the step forward in this entire process of changing the world," Romanian President Ion Iliescu said Sunday.
Following their Reykjavik summit in 1986, during which they discussed the elimination of all strategic nuclear weapons, Reagan and Gorbachev met on several other occasions and developed a personal friendship.
Reagan will be remembered for a historic appeal he made to the Soviet leader in 1987. "If you seek peace, if you seek prosperity for the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, if you seek liberalisation ... tear down this wall," the US President urged Gorbachev as they stood at the Berlin Wall.
"I deem Ronald Reagan a great president, with whom the Soviet leadership was able to launch a very difficult but important dialogue," said Gorbachev.
Other leaders of former Soviet bloc countries also praised the 40th president. Conveying his condolences to Reagan's wife, Nancy, Bulgarian President Georgi Parvanov said "Your husband will go down in world history as an irreconcilable opponent of totalitarianism and violation of human rights."
