24/11/2005
(Standartnews - 24/11/05; European Parliament, EUpolitix, Sofia News Agency, BNN, Focus, Mediapool, Dnevnik, Sega, Europe.bg - 23/11/05)
The majority of members of the European Parliament's (EP) Foreign Affairs committee approved a report Wednesday (23 November) on Bulgaria's preparedness for EU membership. 
The country is scheduled to join the EU in January 2007, along with its northern neighbour, Romania. According to the report, Bulgaria will be able to meet its entry target date, provided judicial and other critical reforms are implemented over the coming months. 
"We need to see rapid and effective action by the Bulgarian authorities to overcome matters of serious concern over the next few months," EP rapporteur for Bulgaria Geoffrey van Orden, who drafted the report, told journalists. The paper will be discussed at an EP plenary session in December. 
According to an EP statement, the document approved on Wednesday urges Bulgarian authorities to show "increased and visible determination" in respect to issues of concern for the EU and "to demonstrate in a concrete manner" that steps have been taken before April 2006 to address those issues. 
Voicing concern about "the brazen nature of Bulgarian organised criminal elements, their contempt for the law and challenge to the authority of the state," the MEPs called on authorities to step up the fight against organised crime. They also said Sofia must continue work on its anti-corruption strategy and judicial reform. 
"Other problematic areas remain Roma integration, child welfare, psychiatric care and the agricultural system. Committee members also call on the government to improve all aspects of border control and to make increased efforts in all areas of the internal market," the EP statement said. 
Despite those problems, the country remains on track to join the EU in January 2007, the MEPs said. Prior to that, however, it must have fulfilled all accession requirements. 
Bulgaria and Romania, slated to join the bloc together, signed their accession treaty on 25 April. The treaty allows Brussels to postpone either country's entry by one year if they fail to meet their commitments. 
In May 2006, the EC will issue its final reports on the two countries, including recommendations on whether they should be admitted into the EU on 1 January 2007, as planned. 
