07/09/2011
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 07/09/11 
Former Yugoslav Army Chief of Staff Momcilo Perisic received a 27-year prison sentence Tuesday (September 6th) for assisting and supporting crimes against Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Croats between 1993 and 1995. 
The trial chamber, presided over by Judge Bakone Moloto, also found Perisic guilty of assisting and supporting the killing of around 7,000 Muslims and displacing the Srebrenica population in July 1995, artillery and sniper attacks on civilians in Sarajevo and for the rocket attacks on Zagreb in May 1995. 
However, the ruling found he had no command responsibility for the crimes, because it "was not proven beyond reasonable doubt that there had been a superior-subordinate relationship between him and those who committed the crimes in Srebrenica and Sarajevo". 
The verdict was reached by a majority of votes from judges Michele Picard from France and Pedro David from Argentina, while presiding Judge Bakone Moloto expressed the opposite opinion. Perisic's defense said they will appeal. 
The verdict attracted great interest in Serbia, as well as in BiH and Croatia. Analysts in Belgrade speculated whether the verdict would have an impact on the processes being run in international courts. 
Croatia and Serbia are mutually suing each other for genocide in the Hague-based International Court of Justice (ICJ). A genocide case BiH filed against Serbia in the ICJ just wrapped up -- the ruling said that Serbia was not directly responsible for the genocide in Srebrenica, but had not done enough to prevent it. 
Serbian Office for Co-operation with the ICTY chief Dusan Ignjatovic told SETimes it was particularly important for Serbia that the verdict determined Perisic was not superior to the Republika Srpska armed forces and their commander Ratko Mladic -- who was indicted for genocide in Srebrenica. 
"It is also important that the trial chamber acquitted Perisic of assistance in the extermination in Srebrenica," Ignjatovic said, adding that he was surprised by the part of the verdict determining Perisic's responsibility for the shelling of Zagreb. 
However, Belgrade Humanitarian Law Fund Director Natasa Kandic described Perisic's sentencing as "appropriate". 
"It is difficult to understand that he [Perisic] had control over the Serb Army in Croatia, but did not have control over the Bosnian Serb Army," Kandic said. 
Vojin Dimitrijevic, director of the Belgrade Center for Human Rights, told SETimes that "nothing major" had changed with the verdict, because Perisic was sentenced for supporting crimes, rather than for genocide. According to him, until now, practice has confirmed that the ICJ rarely reviews its own verdicts. 
However, Bosniak parties in BiH were not satisfied with the verdict. The Party of Democratic Action of BiH senior official Amir Zukic said that Perisic deserved life in prison. 
"Any sentence is too mild for what was done in Sarajevo and Srebrenica," Zukic told the Belgrade media. 
Croatian officials also said Perisic deserved a more severe sentence. However, former head of the Croatian Helsinki Committee for Human Rights Zarko Puhovski said the verdict would not have a negative effect on Serbia's position before the ICJ. 
Puhovski told the Belgrade media that the Serbian general's responsibility for the genocide in Srebrenica was not confirmed, and the verdict could in no way influence Croatia's genocide suit against Serbia. 
