24/04/2006
By Kristina Cuk for Southeast European Times in Zagreb -- 24/04/06
Croatia's EU membership negotiations, launched in October 2005, are continuing on schedule. With the talks currently at the screening stage, some of the challenges and problem areas are beginning to emerge. 
Earlier this month, for instance, the EU issued a statement warning Croatia that it was failing to remove obstacles to the purchase of property by EU citizens and thus breaching its Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the bloc. "According to the free capital protocol, the EU has noticed that Croatia is not honouring its obligations to the SAA, which allows citizens of EU member countries to purchase real estate in Croatia," an official statement from Brussels said. 
This is a contentious issue in Croatia, where many worry that foreign buyers might snap up choice properties, including on Croatia's islands. Particularly sensitive emotions surround the Istria region, which was part of Italy for a period between the two World Wars. 
Given the need to reconcile the EU's requirements with domestic political imperatives, hurdles during the screening process can be expected, and this is not the first time Croatia has drawn complaints. For example, EU representatives have taken issue with a state-sponsored campaign urging consumers to "Buy Croatian". Such a campaign, according to the representatives, conflicts with the EU's rules by unfairly influencing consumer choice, discriminating against foreign products and undermining the equal treatment of goods in the marketplace. 
The Croatian case echoes a similar one involving Ireland. Twenty years ago, that country found itself before the European Court of Justice because of a "Let's Buy Irish" campaign. It lost the case. The basic legal problem in both cases was the use of public funding to interfere with the free market. 
The Croatian Economy Chamber has acknowledged that the "Buy Croatian" campaign does not accord with European rules. It argues, however, that Croatia is not yet an EU member and is therefore not yet obligated to honour the acquis communitaire. For the time being, the Chamber says, the government has the right to boost consumer awareness regarding Croatian products. 
 Besides, says Chamber President Nadan Vidosevic, it's not as though EU member states abstain from promoting their own products. "The thing is that some members of union still do it, only in different ways," Vidosevic claims. 
Be that as it may, the free movement of goods is one of four freedoms which are subject to the EU's screening process. The others are freedom of capital, persons and services. These "four freedoms" are regarded by Brussels as the cornerstones of the EU's internal market, and, according to the EC's November 2005 progress report, Croatia still has a considerable way to go in terms of ensuring them. 
Of the four, the most progress was reported in free movement of capital, with the EC taking note of the Croatian National Bank's moves to liberalise the issuing of securities on the domestic market by non-residents, investment by non-residents in domestic securities and investment funds as well as investment by residents in foreign securities and investment funds. Little achievement was reported in freedom of cross-border services, while Croatian legislation needs adjustment in order to meet the requirements for free movement of persons, including non-discrimination against migrant workers. 
Another area where difficulties have already come up during the screening process is that of harmonising Croatia's customs regime with the acquis communitaire. The country has a surplus of workers employed in border control, and as many as 1,000 could stand to lose their jobs as procedures are brought into line with the bloc's rules. Once Croatia gains EU membership, the borders with Hungary and Slovenia will no longer exist in their present form, while the borders with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Serbia-Montenegro will form part of the EU's external boundary. Complicating these changes are unresolved border issues, including the Piran Bay dispute with Slovenia. 
Membership has potential implications for ethnic Croats living in BiH and other parts of the former Yugoslavia. According to the Croatian Ministry of Internal Affairs, between 12,000 and 15,000 ethnic Croats per year apply for citizenship in Croatia; under current law they are entitled to it regardless of where they live. Non-Croats, meanwhile, can only become citizens if they reside in Croatia for at least five years. 
Croats living in BiH and elsewhere have expressed worries that they could lose their dual Croatian citizenship; however, both the EU and Croatia have sought to assure them this is not the case. 
During the screening, the EU conducts an analysis of a candidate country's legislation to determine its compatibility with the acquis, on a chapter by chapter basis. Originally consisting of 31 chapters, the acquis has been re-divided into 35 for the negotiations with Croatia and Turkey. As the pre-screening of individual chapters is completed, the way is cleared for detailed negotiations to begin. 
Screening has already taken place, and in some cases been completed, for chapters on science and research; education and culture; public procurement; competition policy; right of establishment and freedom to provide services; free movement of capital; agriculture and rural development; free movement of goods; justice, freedom and security; customs; intellectual property; social property and employment; economic and monetary union; fisheries; food safety, veterinary and phytosanitary policy; enterprise and industrial policy; financial services; and the environment. Croatian officials say they expect the entire screening process to be wrapped up by October 2006, during the Finnish presidency of the EU. 
