10/05/2010
(AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, Bloomberg, FT, Wall Street Journal, BBC, EurActiv, Euobserver, EU - 10/05/10)
The EU unveiled early Monday (May 10th) a record 750-billion-euro rescue package designed to protect the 16-nation eurozone from potential disaster in the wake of the Greek crisis. 
The unprecedented aid programme, amounting to more than 70 times the overall assistance provided for post-war recovery in Europe under the US Marshall Plan between 1948 and 1951, was announced after 11 hours of marathon talks among the EU finance ministers in Brussels. 
They raced against time to reach an agreement before the opening of Asian markets on Monday. In doing so, leaders hoped to stave off a fresh attack on the euro that could push the European common currency and EU markets to new depths. 
"We are placing considerable sums in the interest of stability in Europe," Spanish Finance Minister Elena Salgado, whose country holds the rotating six-month presidency of the Union until the end of June, said after chairing the meeting in Brussels. 
Under the three-year plan, the 16 eurozone states would promise backing for a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) -- a loan-guarantee mechanism of up to 440 billion euros that would be available to members of the euro group facing serious debt difficulties. It would complement an up to 60 billion-euro emergency funding from the European Commission "for member states in difficulties caused by exceptional circumstances beyond member states' control", according to an EU statement. 
The IMF will also participate, by providing "at least half as much as the EU contribution", or 250 billion euros. 
"We shall defend the euro whatever it takes," EU Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs Olli Rehn said after the Brussels meeting. 
He also explained that the money under the SPV would be arranged in a "pro rata" manner. Thus, Germany -- the largest of the 16 eurozone economies -- would have to contribute up to 123 billion euros to the mechanism, while a country like Cyprus would have to provide nearly 1 billion euros, according to the Wall Street Journal. 
The 440 billion-euro programme is not expected to be enacted immediately, as it needs to be formally approved by both the head of government and the national parliament of each of the contributing states. But EU officials appeared confident that would not be problematic. 
"We were able to do it with Greece; we will be able to do it for any other country if need be," Rehn told reporters Monday. 
His statement came less than 24 hours after the IMF Executive Board approved the institution's 30 billion-euro contribution to the 110 billion-euro rescue plan for Greece. Leaders of the 16 EU member states that use the euro endorsed the group's share of 80 billion euros on Friday. 
