11/05/2010
By Natasa Radic for Southeast European Times in Zagreb --11/05/10 
Police arrested a 20-year-old football fan on Saturday (May 8th) for seriously injuring a police officer during a match at Zagreb's Maksimir Stadium on May 1st. The policeman lost an eye when fans of Dinamo (Zagreb) and Hajduk (Split) teams went on a rampage. Brawling spilled out of the stadium and into the streets. 
With almost 90 people arrested, and 15 police officers and six fans suffering injuries during and after the game, the government has stepped in and called for a crackdown on violence at sporting matches. 
"We need drastic legal changes and measures against violent fans and its swift implementation," said Prime Minister Jadranka Kosor. 
"I saw footage of a father running away with his children while the seats were flying around. I am interested in protecting people like that," she added. 
Croatian sports fans have built a reputation for trouble, with rioting both at home and abroad causing security nightmares and material damage. Many ordinary fans are now wary of attending matches. 
"It's not a sport anymore. Now you wonder if you'll be beaten with a broken seat over your head at a football match," says Robert Martic, a Zagreb salesman. He prefers watching a match from the safety of his home. 
Neno Smiljanic, 27, a Hajduk supporter, thinks the fans are not the problem; it's the institutions. 
 "The violence escalates because the authorities are hypocritical. They make laws and then do not respect those laws. Former Prime Minister Ivo Sanader passed a law forbidding drinking alcohol at sports venues after which the cameras caught him drinking wine at a handball match," says Smiljanic. 
Alen Galovic, the executive editor of the daily 24 sata and a sports fan himself, told SETimes he is not surprised that dangerous hooligans rule Croatia's football stadiums. 
 "Croatian hooligans are among the worst in Europe; their reputation is horrible. The authorities ignore their racist behaviour," says Galovic. He thinks the police should act as extended authorities and fight hooliganism. 
The problem isn't confined to one sport. A week before the football violence broke out, supporters of the capital's Cibona basketball team clashed with security guards at Zagreb Arena where the team was playing Belgrade's Partizan. The game was stopped for ten minutes due to the incident, and police arrested 19 people. 
