05/06/2013
By Katica Djurovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 05/06/13
A recent study is suggesting that politicians and citizens need to work together to boost trust in political institutions and increase citizens' participation. 
According to the study, the solution lies in educating citizens so they understand the way democracy works. Local media should promote positive examples of civil engagement, and politicians should make institutions more responsible, open and transparent to citizens. 
"This is a perfect time for Serbian citizens and government to start paying attention to each other. Because success of the government depends on the amount of involvement of Serbian citizens in it," Tom Kelly, director of the National Democratic Institute in Serbia, told SETimes. 
"When democracy works, people are engaged. There are different levels of engagement in the world, but in emerging democracies like Serbia, participation is important," Kelly added. 
The study, by the Centre for Research, Transparency and Accountability and Ipsos Strategic Marketing in Belgrade, revealed that the only political engagement that Serbian citizens are willing to take part in is voting in elections. 
The study, which polled 1,600 citizens, showed that between 2004 and 2013 the number of citizens taking part in any political process has dropped by 18 percent. 
"In comparison to previous years, interest in politics and participation shows a decline. The level of participation in democratic processes is an indicator of the health of the society. In Serbia, people are interested in politics, but they don't show much desire to be actively involved in it. People don't really believe they can change anything," Vukosava Crnjanski Sabovic, director of Centre for Research, Transparency and Accountability, told SETimes. 
Just more than 60 percent of citizens do not trust politicians and political institutions. 
According to Snezana Djordjevic, a professor at the Faculty of Political Science at Belgrade University, this is the main reason people refuse to take part in politics. 
"In order to have people actively engaged in politics, we need to have democratic procedures in decision making, passing laws and other normative acts. That is still lacking in Serbia, since most of the political apparatus is corrupted," Djordjevic told SETimes. 
Serbian citizens admit people lack motivation and hope. 
"I lost trust in our political system and democracy. I don't even vote any more. I think that the level of awareness of our people is on the minimal level. There are so many problems that people face so they don't have time even for family issues and definitely not for participating in any political activity," Aleksandar Andonovski, 28, an IT expert from Belgrade, told SETimes. 
Others feel more optimistic about people's role in democracy. 
However, the study showed that people are interested in participating in local political process. 
More than 30 percent of citizens said they will take part in political process on a local level, while 21 percent expressed will on a national level. Almost 19 percent, however, said they do not know how to take part in political life. 
"I protested in the 1990s student protests, I protested for [Milosevic's ousting]. Something did change and that is why I still like supporting political parties, attend political relies and sign petitions," Ivana Mihajlovic, a Belgrade telecommunication manager, told SETimes. 
"Whenever I watch news on the TV and see general strikes in Greece or protests in France, I wish Serbia would be like that. Unfortunately, many people live in fear that if they stand against the problems they would lose that little they have," Mihajlovic said. 
Other countries in the region have same problems. 
In Montenegro, a roundtable discussion on citizens' participation in local government last year in Podgorica concluded that people feel pessimistic about taking part in any democratic action besides voting. 
"Citizens' activity has never been easier with social media and the internet. If you can call a flash mob to dance on the street, then you should be able to call citizens to take part in a protest or support an action that is closely connected to the improvement of their life and position in the society," Crnjanski Sabovic told SETimes. 
Do you vote in elections? What roles should citizens take in politics? Tell us below in the comments. 
