19/10/2009
By Besa Beqiri for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 19/10/09
In a new report, the European Commission (EC) is holding out the promise of bringing Kosovo citizens into some of the bloc's programmes and initiatives. Brussels wants "practical measures to help improve the lives of all Kosovo citizens", it says. 
The report, entitled "Kosovo -- Fulfilling its European Perspective", was released on Wednesday (October 14th). 
It calls for jump-starting a process that should culminate in visa-free travel for Kosovo citizens. The Commission is also eyeing preparations for a comprehensive trade agreement, provided Kosovo meets the criteria. 
"These measures will show Kosovo that EU approximation is not something abstract, but that it is about real, tangible benefits for all," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said. "We now call on EU member states to agree to our proposals and to ensure Kosovo keeps pace with developments in the rest of the Western Balkans." 
According to the report, Kosovo could participate in programmes dealing with education, employment and other areas. Commissioners are also proposing that the EU upgrade its political dialogue with Pristina and widen the scope of financial assistance to include cross-border co-operation. 
The measures, part of the EC's 2009 Enlargement Strategy, will be implemented progressively, and will depend on progress made by Kosovo. Brussels has also made clear that its proposals do not amount to a verdict on Kosovo status, which is still the subject of disagreements among member states. 
The EC's paper was released in conjunction with its progress report on Kosovo, which highlighted both the new country's achievements and the challenges that remain. 
Stability has been maintained but remains fragile, the EC said, highlighting the need to fight corruption and organised crime, strengthen administrative capacity and ensure the protection of Serb and other minorities. 
According to the Commission, Kosovo has made progress in meeting the political criteria by strengthening its legal framework. The main institutions of governance are in place, and are carrying out their responsibilities in co-operation with international organisations, the progress report said. 
However, it also warned that Kosovo has not yet established a functioning market economy, and lags behind in other areas. 
"The report notes the important steps already taken by Kosovo towards its European perspective," EU Special Representative Pieter Feith said. 
"It also suggests areas where the Kosovo authorities can enhance their efforts to implement further reforms in the field of governance, the economy and in strengthening Kosovo's democratic and multiethnic foundations." 
Taken together, the two reports contain "concrete proposals on how to advance further [Kosovo's] European perspective -- in particular with regard to measures in the area of visas and trade," he said. 
"I encourage the Kosovo authorities to study both documents thoroughly and to see this as an opportunity to be seized for Kosovo's future, by taking timely actions as outlined for the benefit of everyone living in Kosovo," Feith added. 
