11/04/2011
By Jusuf Ramadanovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 11/04/11
As commercial farmers in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) strive to keep up with market conditions, they have been replacing native or autochthonic crops with foreign ones that produce higher yields. 
Native plant species, including some that are exclusive to the country, are in danger of disappearing. The country's first Gene Bank, established three years ago, is helping to preserve them. 
Two young engineers, Fuad Gasi and Idin Fazlic, are in charge of the bank, which is staffed by volunteers. It currently stores the seeds of 500 indigenous plants. 
The bank was established and operates in close co-operation with the Agricultural and Food Technology Faculty in Sarajevo. 
According to Gasi, close co-operation with the agriculture sector is vital to the project's operations. "Farmers are the prime actors in the process" of gathering and preserving autochthonic farm plant resources," he told SETimes. 
"Genetic diversity of a certain culture is directly linked to the ability of the given culture to adapt to unfavourable climatic conditions, as well as to various pests and diseases. The lesser genetic diversity of a certain farming agriculture, the bigger the risk to have a new disease bring about a total destruction of this cultivar in a certain area," he explains. 
Fazlic says the effort may not stop with plants, that the opening of a "department for autochthonic animal species is also expected soon", in co-operation with experts from the Veterinary Faculty in Sarajevo. The project has been hampered in part by the global recession. 
For now however, "the focus is on gathering and preservation of seeds of plant species, in particular ... farming cultures," Fazlic says. 
The bank contains a laboratory for molecular biology, where they perform genetic identification and characterisation of the autochthonic materials, which according to Gasi, is very much like forensic analyses in human genetics. 
"It enables the assessment of the genetic structure for specific farming cultures," he notes. 
Preserving this indigenous material largely depends on the financial viability of the Gene Bank, given its non-profit status. 
Both Gasi and Fazlic are proud of the relationship between their Gene Bank and the project of the European Co-operative Programme for Plant Genetic Resources. All seed duplicates are sent to the Svalbard Global Seed Vault, which was established in an underground atomic shelter in the most northerly Norwegian island of Svalbard in 2008, to preserve plant genes from all over the world for future generations. 
Gasi also notes that the autochthonic species at the Gene Bank constitute a significant resource for biodiversity, a precondition for farming cultures to adapt to changes in the environment -- global climate changes, for instance. 
Losing biodiversity "would reduce the ability to adapt for the farming cultures, and it would make part of our biocultural heritage disappear", he tells SETimes. 
These indigenous species, he says, are an important part of BiH's national identity. "They have been developed from our ancestors ... they constitute the result of centuries of efforts," says Gasi. 
