22/08/2012
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 22/08/12
Romania's Constitutional Court on Tuesday (August 21st) affirmed that a national referendum to oust President Traian Basescu fell short of the required 50 percent turnout, clearing the way for him to return to office and dealing a setback to the ruling social-liberal coalition (USL) that attempted to orchestrate his removal. 
But commentators said that the political turmoil is expected to continue, with parliamentary elections scheduled for November. 
"It is obvious there will be no political calm, we can tell that by the tough statements made yesterday by the social-liberal leaders," Septimius Pirvu, deputy director of the Pro Democracy Association, a leading Romanian NGO, told SETimes. "The court's decision is set to create further political disputes and there is a risk of blockages in the activity of the central institutions." 
Basescu was impeached and suspended in July by the social-liberal ruling majority led by Prime Minister Victor Ponta and Crin Antonescu, the current interim president, who accused Basescu of overstepping his constitutional prerogatives. Though about 88 percent of voters who cast ballots in the July 29th referendum voted in favor of Basescu's removal, only 46 percent of the registered voters cast their ballot. The referendum requires at least 50 percent of registered voters to act to be valid. 
USL complained that the electoral lists were not accurate and asked the Constitutional Court to allow the government to update them after the referendum, in a final effort to validate the referendum. The court on August 2nd agreed to withhold its ruling until it received the updated lists. 
Those arrived this week, and on Tuesday, the court voted 6-3 to invalidate the impeachment referendum. Basescu is expected to return to office later this week after the parliament convenes to accept the ruling. 
"We will observe the court's decision, but it is an unfair one, against the democratic principles and an absolute majority of Romanians who voted for a political regime change," Ponta said. 
Antonescu, the liberal leader, said "It is a hard day for people who believe in democracy. Our fight against Basescu's regime will continue until he is eliminated." 
"The decision was a legal and correct one, even though people dislike it. Basescu was suspended with no constitutional grounds," Mihaela Miroiu, a professor with the National School of Political and Administrative studies in Bucharest, told SETimes. 
"Of course the political confrontation will continue, but I see the other side of the coin of this crisis: all these debates we witnessed are teaching Romanians what the rule of law means, because we lack political culture" she said. 
The social-liberals' efforts to out Basescu drew the ire of the West who accused the coalition of encroaching upon the rule of law. The tensions also send the Romanian currency to a record low against the euro and seriously shook foreign investors' trust. 
Many were disappointed by the decision. "This may be legal, but it is definitely not moral. What about those 7.4 million Romanians who told Basescu 'no'? How can their vote be ignored since they so much invoked the word democracy these days?" Adrian Patrascu, a computer engineer in Iassy, told SETimes. 
But Miroiu disagreed. "If you subtract 7.4 million from the 18 million registered voters you get an even bigger figure of people who either supported Basescu or who did not believe in this referendum and boycotted it," she said. 
The crisis may also produce effects in this fall's elections, Pirvu said. "Many citizens are frustrated their vote did not count on the court's decision, so we may witness a low turnout or a negative vote at the parliamentary elections in November." 
