16/06/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 16/06/10
Albin Kurti, the controversial leader of the Vetëvendosje movement, was released on Monday (June 14th) after his weekend arrest at his organisation's headquarters. Judges at the District Court in Pristina handed him a nine-month sentence, but took into consideration the amount of time he has already spent in detention. 
 He was convicted of "participating in a group obstructing official persons in performing their official duties". Two other charges against him -- participating in a crowd committing a criminal offence and calling for resistance -- were dropped. 
The case stemmed from violent demonstrations staged by Vetëvendosje on February 10th 2007, in which two young protesters died after Romanian police officers serving with UNMIK fired rubber bullets. 
 A defiant Kurti told supporters that he did not recognise the validity of the court proceedings and had refused to appear in court repeatedly. 
 "I did not show up for the first court session because I do not recognise EULEX, and because this case is politically motivated," he said, adding that he and his movement consider the EU mission "an undemocratic power". 
 In a statement to SETimes, EULEX spokesperson Karin Limdal said normal judicial procedures were being followed. "A basic principle of rule of law is the right for every defendant, including Mr. Kurti, to have a fair and independent trial within reasonable time," Limdal said. "Everyone is innocent until proven guilty in front of an independent and fair court of justice." 
"Mr. Kurti's case was inherited from UNMIK and it was a normal judicial case which needed to be dealt with like any other case," Limdal said. "It simply couldn't be ignored by the judiciary. This trial was carried out within the Kosovo justice system, with a local prosecutor and a mixed panel of judges taken a decision based on the law in Kosovo." 
During his arrest Saturday, mayhem broke out at Vetevendosje headquarters. Special units of the Kosovo police used tear gas as they forcibly entered the headquarters, and the organisation claims some of its activists were later beaten at the police station. 
Kosovo Police officials told the Council for the Protection of the Human Rights and Freedoms, which is investigating the circumstances of Kurti's arrest, that 11 policemen were injured, three of them requiring treatment at the Emergency Centre. Four police cars and two EULEX cars were also damaged. 
EULEX said it "appreciates the good work of the Kosovo Police, the local prosecution and the local judiciary in fulfilling their respective roles and thus helping to strengthen the rule of law in Kosovo". 
 Kurti's arrest took place the same day that Vetevendosje said it is considering participation in Kosovo's next general elections. Local political analysts say he is likely to benefit politically from the latest events. 
 "Could anyone imagine more spectacular circumstances for Vetevendosje's entry into the electoral game?" wrote Shkelzen Maliqi in the daily Express. "Kurti has very well calculated how to mask the failure of the movement's previous strategy." Baton Haxhiu of TV Klan Kosova says Kurti and Vetëvendosje have chosen an opportune moment to become part of politics. "There is a loss of trust among citizens with regard to both the parties in power and the opposition," he told Express. 
Saturday's events allow Vetëvendosje to position itself in the role of victim, Haxhiu said, boosting its claims to speak for those who feel excluded. Ramush Haradinaj, a former prime minister and current leader of the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo, spoke to Kosovo media after Kurti's arrest. He said Vetëvendosje has the right to participate in elections, but that the police also have an obligation to carry out their duties. 
 "The decision to get into the political life is legitimate -- a right common to all, including Vetëvendosje," Haradinaj said. At the same time, he added, "if there is an arrest warrant, the police do their job. "We have to understand this -- just as Albin [Kurti] has his rights in the country, the policeman also has his rights; he also exercises a function," he said. 
