05/03/2007
By Bekim Greicevci for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 05/03/07
The Vienna meeting between Pristina and Belgrade on the draft plan for the Kosovo status concluded on Friday (March 2nd) without an agreement. Over the past seven days, under the chairmanship of UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari, the delegations discussed issues such as constitutional provisions, decentralisation, and cultural and religious heritage. 
Ahtisaari said the talks provided an opportunity for the parties to clarify their positions on all aspects of the settlement proposal, adding there should be no problem for either side to understand what the other side means when they look at the proposal. "This has been a useful exercise," Ahtisaari said. 
"On the negotiating issues -- the status -- the parties remain diametrically opposed in their views. So, there is no movement on that side and that is reflected in their position when it comes to constitutional principles associated with the settlement plan," he added. 
The spokesperson of the Kosovo negotiating team, Skender Hyseni, said that the Serb delegation wanted to change Ahtisaari's entire blueprint. "The Belgrade delegation has come to Vienna with a destructive approach, trying to draft a new document on Kosovo status," Hyseni said. He added that the current blueprint is positive, hoping that Ahtisaari will take into consideration suggestions from the Pristina side. 
"It is unclear at the moment what the UN special Kosovo envoy will do with the well-phrased and substantiated arguments and amendments we've presented in Vienna, and to what extent he would acknowledge them," the co-ordinator of Belgrade's negotiating team, Leon Kojen, told Belgrade-based Radio B92 Ironically, the parties agreed only on the cost for hiring a press conference room during the talks. 
Ahtisaari has invited the political leaders of Kosovo and Serbia to Vienna on March 10th to attend a high level meeting. The Contact Group and representatives from the EU, NATO and UNMIK have been invited to attend as well. 
"I have promised to review the Vienna discussions so far and look ino the possible adjustments to the proposal. Also, I have promised to send the revised proposal to the parties early enough for study before the delegations come to Vienna on the 10th", Ahtisaari said. 
According to sources, Ahtisaari's revised plan will be given to the parties on Wednesday. 
