26/09/2006
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 26/09/06
A major political and cultural event began Monday (25 September) in Bucharest. The 11th Francophony summit brings together 49 member states, four associate states, ten observer states, two officially invited countries and two candidate states for observer status. Some 940 journalists are among the 3,000 guests, who together represent nearly 710 million people across the globe. 
The term Francophony refers to the international community of French-speaking nations. In addition to countries where French is a majority language, the international organisation of Francophony, founded in 1970, also includes nations with cultural or historical ties to France. 
Romania traditionally has had a close relationship to France. Many Romanian-born intellectuals, such as Emil Cioran and Eugene Ionesco, wrote major works in French or emigrated to France. Nicknamed the "Paris of the East," Bucharest not only has an Arch of Triumph similar to that of its Western counterpart, but is also known for its elegant, French-influenced architecture. 
Many parts of the city's historic centre were razed by dictator Nicolae Ceausescu in the 1980s. The Francophony summit is being held in the giant "People's Palace" built by Ceausescu and now used by parliament. 
The summit's top guest is French President Jacques Chirac. He is being joined by UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso, EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn, Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper, Quebec Prime Minister Jean Charest, and other leaders and officials. Romanian President Traian Basescu will deliver opening remarks at the high-level session, which begins on Wednesday. 
On Monday and Tuesday, the organisation's Permanent Council and Ministerial Conference met to accept new member states and elect a new secretary-general. 
Information technology in education is the main theme of this year's summit. Cultural-linguistic diversity, development issues and promoting the French language in central and Eastern Europe are also on the agenda. 
The summit is organised every two years. This one is the first to take place in a European country other than France. 
Romania is spending some 9.4m euros on the event, much of it on security. The Service for Protection and Guard (SPP), along with Romanian intelligence, military and interior ministry structures, are on high alert. On Saturday, a security drill was held along Bucharest's central thoroughfares used for the official convoys and around the Palace of the Parliament. 
