03/09/2004
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 03/09/04
A new round in the trial of 17 men accused of war crimes at the Ovcara farm near Vukovar in 1991 began this week at the regional court in Belgrade. The court, in closed session, has been hearing the testimony of a witness associate, the Serbian legal system’s term for defendants offered immunity in exchange for co-operation. 
According to sources, the court will next hear witnesses from Croatia. All 17 defendants in the case, which the court began hearing in March, have pleaded not guilty to the murder of 192 Croatian prisoners of war in November 1991. 
The proceedings, widely seen as a test of Serbia-Montenegro's ability to handle war crimes cases, stem from events that took place following the capture of Vukovar by Yugoslav Army troops on 19 November 1991. Hundreds of men were transported from the city's hospital to the Ovcara site. Most were beaten, shot and buried in a mass grave. 
UN troops secured the location in early 1992, preventing the destruction of evidence, and an investigative team later exhumed the bodies of 294 victims. 
Three former Yugoslav Army officers -- Mile Mrksic, Veselin Sljivancanin and Miroslav Radic -- are on trial at the UN war crimes tribunal at The Hague, accused of ordering or allowing the massacre. 
Families of the victims, who are closely monitoring the proceedings, have asked presiding Judge Djordje Trifunovic for access to documents connected to the Vukovar hospital records. According to the president of the Association of Missing Persons from Varazdin, Blazenka Djurdjek, the families were shown some information, but not what they were expecting. 
"We were received by Trifunovic and though I hoped that we would find out something, we were more than disappointed. It is true that we had access to 77 protocols, but they are not all connected with 1991, but to exhumations in Belgrade," Djurdjek said. 
"All those protocols are for unidentified persons, but I think that something will be solved for them also, given that their blood samples were taken," she added. 
The Croatian Committee for Prisoners and Missing Persons is also seeking the documentation. 
