06/10/2011
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 06/10/11
EULEX arrested six people and conducted 14 searches in an organised crime investigation operation Wednesday (October 5th). The mission stated the operation is related to "a major investigation into alleged corruption and procurement fraud". 
"The alleged fraud relates to procurement within Kosovo police and its business suppliers of weapons and ammunition. Due to the alleged fraud, Kosovo police budget suffered losses that may amount to millions of euros, which make Kosovo police the primary victim in the affair," EULEX said. 
Nicholas Hawton, EULEX deputy spokesperson, told SETimes that prosecutors will decide on future steps. "Today's operation is closed," Hawton said, without divulging much about searches conducted in Germany as a facet of the operation. 
"German police also searched one business premise and one private house in Germany as a part of the investigation," the mission said. 
"In addition, 12 locations were searched all over Kosovo, including private houses, business premises and public offices," it said. Kosovo media reported that documents, computers and other evidence were confiscated. 
Taken into custody were the head of the Kosovo Police Administration Ragip Bunjaku, the head of Procurement in the Kosovo Police Xhevahire Vatovci and Kadrush Koliqi, head of the department for weapons and munitions in the Interior Ministry. Three businessmen were also detained. 
A EULEX prosecutor heads the investigation, supervised by the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office, but EULEX has been investigating the case since 2009. 
Mentor Vrajolli, senior researcher in the Kosovo Centre for Security Studies, says such allegations are serious, greatly damaging the image of the Kosovo police. 
"Such allegations and doubts do not come unexpected. Although Kosovo police were praised for being transparent, the transparency of this institution has been superficial," Vrajolli told SETimes. He compared the level of transparency to that of the Kosovo Security Force and the Kosovo Intelligence Agency. 
His centre claims that the lack of institutional transparency created the potential for abuse of power by different officials and damaged the Kosovo police budget. 
"Lack of internal transparency of these institutions can result in major corruption," Vrajolli said, pointing out that by law, the security institutions should report on the disciplinary violations and spending of funds. 
"The security institutions are financed by the tax-payers who have a right to be regularly informed, according to the legislation, on how the funds are used in these institutions," Vrajolli told SETimes. 
The Kosovo daily Express reported on Thursday (October 6th) that Interior Minister Bajram Rexhepi was informed by EULEX one day ahead of the operation. "They told me that they will search the Ministry and the Police. I asked them to have this issue [investigated] to the end and I support this EULEX action," he said. 
Rexhepi also noted that the period under investigation does not include the time he was leading the ministry. "This is suspected to have happened before I was appointed Interior Minister," Rexhepi said. 
