30/05/2012
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 30/05/12
Prime Minister Victor Ponta has asked parliament to convene on June 12th to decide who should represent the country at the European Council on June 28th. His call comes after weeks of wrangling with President Traian Basescu over who of the two is entitled to represent Romania at such summits. 
"We have to decide clearly: whoever goes there must have a mandate to represent Romania," Ponta said, explaining why he asked lawmakers to settle the dispute. He argued the head of government should attend the summit since it is dedicated to measures meant to stimulate economic growth in the EU. 
"Basescu [as head of state] has neither attributions in economic problems or policies nor the support of the government or the parliamentary majority," Ponta added. 
Last week, Basescu represented Romania at an informal EU summit, but his presence in Brussels was disputed until the last moment. Amid the rising political tension between the two leaders, a representative of the European Council warned there is only one seat reserved for Romania. 
Ponta leads a three-party coalition government that came to power in early May after the previous cabinet led by Mihai Razvan Ungureanu was toppled in an April 27th no-confidence vote. The new government boasts a large majority in parliament after a reconfiguration of seats, prompted mainly by a series of defections in the democrat-liberal party, now the main opposition party. 
As for this new dispute, "This protocol issue reveals how flimsy and insubstantial the basis for so much political activity in Romania is," Tom Gallagher, professor of East European Politics at the University of Bradford in Northern England, told SETimes. 
"It is surprising that a new government under an untested prime minister will concern itself with procedural issues so early. It does not inspire too much confidence in its readiness to grapple with the serious, long-term problems that overshadow Romania. Also, I am surprised that Mr. Ponta turned this issue into such a melodramatic one. It is obvious that he hopes to humiliate the president by undermining his authority," Gallagher added. 
The constitution does not specifically address the issue of representation at summits. Despite that, Augustin Zegrean, the head of the Constitutional Court, the highest court in the country, has said that Basescu should represent the country on June 28th. Ponta reacted by asking parliament to decide. 
But lawmakers lack jurisdiction as well. "Even if the system is not clearly defined, this dispute has no referee, whether it is the parliament or the Constitutional Court. It should be settled through common sense," Cristian Ghinea, director of the Romanian Centre for European Policies, told SETimes. "Parliament has no role in mediating this since the president is not elected by the lawmakers while the Constitutional Court is called to have its say merely on legislation," Ghinea added, underlining Ponta is using it just to put pressure on Basescu. 
The dispute risks tarnishing the country's image, Gallagher warned. "The latest flare-up is another example of parliamentarians fleeing from their natural role to pass legislation meant to improve the country and be a forum for serious debate about the current national issues of the day," he said. 
"It will probably confirm the Romanian political elite as a bunch of prima donnas concerned with status ad protocol and how to manipulate the country's laws and conventions in order to pursue short-term parochial ends. It will suggest to some diplomats and foreign investors that those hoping to lead Romania in the future are profoundly un-serious people," Gallagher concluded. 
To those in the street, the dispute is meaningless. "[It’s] another flat political wrangle with a touch of personal conflict. But it is an electoral year after all. Any win, in any situation, tips the balance for one of the two rivals," Daniel Iordache, a 45-year-old marketing manager, told SETimes. 
