11/04/2013
By Safet Kabashaj for Southeast European Times in Pristina -- 11/04/13
In an effort to accelerate ethnic reconciliation, representatives of several multi-ethnic municipalities in eastern Kosovo signed an eight-point deal that stipulates the importance of multi-ethnicity and its impact in making Kosovo a sustainable democracy. 
"We accepted it without any hesitation, because anything that deals with reconciliation, understanding and co-operation is welcomed by us," Bajrush Ymeri, the president of Novoberdo municipality, told SETimes. 
He said the deal, which was signed late last month by the municipalities of Gjilan, Kamenica, Novobrdo and the Serb municipality of Ranilug, followed a process of consultations with the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe. 
Ymeri said that the eastern Kosovo region generally enjoys multi-ethnic co-existence. Fewer atrocities during the 1998-99 conflict occurred in that area due to the region's advanced level of interethnic co-operation, he said. 
"We have consistently provided good examples and because of that our municipality often is a site of visits from representatives of other municipalities, as an example to follow. I have even hosted students from the northern part of Mitrovica," Ymeri said. 
Omer Daku, vice-president of Gjilan municipality, said the statement will further strengthen the tolerance that is present among ethnicities in his region. 
"We have a vice president for communities, a Serb, who provides a significant contribution for consolidating positive inter-ethnic relations," Daku told SETimes. 
Under the agreement, eight areas were defined in which the four municipalities pledged to work in the future to achieve reconciliation and tolerance. 
Nikola Gaon, Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe spokesman, said that the agreement is the first step of the reconciliation process. 
"The municipalities will next form a joint team that will plan confidence-building activities for young people and support municipalities in implementing their commitments, whereas the [organisation] will support the holding of an inter-ethnic forum for high school students," Gaon said. 
Local Serb politicians stressed the need for permanent actions that can contribute to the acceleration of inter-ethnic co-operation. 
"I'm in favour of expanding the number of municipalities included in this statement. That's a great sign of co-operation," Zivko Tomic, a member of Ranilug assembly, told SETimes. 
"[The] municipality of Ranilug has had very good relations with Kamenica and other surrounding municipalities, but it will be useful if the initiative is expanded to other municipalities," he added. 
Nenad Jevtic, from Kamenica, said it's nice when your own region can export positive examples in other part of Kosovo. 
"I hope these examples of understanding, will have some impact in other regions," Jevtic told SETimes. 
Kamenica resident Bislim Elezi hopes that the need to focus on inter-ethnicity will end. 
"One step near to the end of inter-ethnic issue means one step closer to the day when leaders will invest all their capacity in people's real concerns, jobs, employment, welfare beyond their ethnic lines," Elezi told SETimes. 
Is interethnic tolerance growing in the region? Why? Let us know your thoughts in the comment section. 
