10/02/2006
(The Irish Times - 08/02/06; Reuters, AFP, BBC, VOA, UPI, Sofia News Agency, NetInfo - 07/02/06; AP, AFP - 05/02/06; AGI, HINA - 04/02/06; Turin 2006 Official Web Site; International Olympic Committee; National Olympic Committees)
They have worked hard over the past four years and now hope to see their efforts rewarded. Although Balkan countries are sending fewer than 100 athletes to the XX Winter Olympics opening in Turin on Friday (10 February), several competitors stand a chance of winning a medal. 
A total of 2,500 athletes from 85 countries will compete for 252 gold, silver and bronze medals during the 17-day Games. The Winter Olympics include 15 sports disciplines: alpine skiing, biathlon, bobsleigh, curling, cross-country skiing, freestyle skiing, ice hockey, figure skating, luge, Nordic combined, speed skating, short track, skeleton, ski jumping and snowboard. 
Croatia's Janica Kostelic, who won triple gold and a silver at the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, could improve that record by medalling in each of the alpine skiing disciplines in which she will compete. Her first start is in the Ladies' Downhill event at San Sicario Fraiteve on 15 February. The 23-year-old champion is also scheduled to race in the Ladies' Combined, Slalom, Giant Slalom and Super G events. She has won in all of them during this season's World Cup circuit. 
Her brother, Ivica Kostelic, and fellow skier Nika Fleiss are also on the Croatian team. They will compete in five alpine disciplines. The Croatian team also includes competitors in five other disciplines -- biathlon, bobsleigh, cross-country skiing, figure skating and skeleton. 
Bulgaria, which won one silver and two bronze medals at the Salt Lake City Games and one gold at Nagano in 1998, is also hoping to do better this time around. 
"I hope Turin 2006 will be Bulgaria's most successful Winter Olympics," said Bulgarian Olympic Committee head Stefka Kostadinova as she left for Italy on Tuesday. 
The country's star in short track, Evgenia Radanova, won three gold medals less than a month ago at the European Championships in Poland. At the 2002 Winter Olympics, she won a silver and a bronze medal. However, the competition at Turin is expected to be intense, with two Chinese and two Korean short track stars vying for gold. 
Ekaterina Dafovska, who won Bulgaria's first-ever Winter Olympics gold medal in the women's biathlon 15km individual event in Nagano eight years ago, will carry her country's flag at the opening ceremony Friday. 
Bulgaria's 21-member team also includes Irina Nikoultchina, who won bronze in the women's biathlon 10km pursuit event at Salt Lake City, as well as the country's top ice dancing duo, Albena Denkova and Maxim Staviski. 
With 27 athletes, Romania has the largest of the Balkan teams. The Romanian athletes will compete in eight of the winter Olympic disciplines, including alpine skiing, biathlon, bobsleigh, cross country, figure skating, luge, short track and speed skating. Cross country skiers Zsolt Antal, Florentin Mihai Galiceanu, Monika Gyogy and Camelia Ana Csernescki will each compete in four of the discipline's events. 
Serbia-Montenegro will be represented by six athletes, including alpine skiers Jelena Lolovic, Maria Trmcic and Zelimir Vukovic. 
Alpine skiers Zana Novakovic, Moica Rataj and Marco Schafferer will compete for Bosnia and Herzegovina, while Erjon Tola, also an alpine skier, is expected to represent Albania in the Turin games. 
