30/05/2005
By Marija Lazarova for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 30/05/05
The Macedonian government recently agreed to provide bail guarantees for two former officials now being detained at the war crimes tribunal at The Hague. It will now be up to the tribunal to decide whether the guarantees are enough to allow Ljube Boskovski and Johan Tarculovski to be released pending their trial. 
"Acting at the request of The Hague tribunal, the Macedonian government will give guarantees for Boskovski and Tarculovski," Justice Minister Meri Mladenovska-Gjorgievska said. "That is, the government will answer the questionnaire submitted by the tribunal." 
Boskovski was interior minister in the government of Prime Minister Ljubco Georgievski, while Tarculovski was a security officer. Both face charges at The Hague for their alleged roles in an operation that killed seven civilians in Ljuboten in August 2001, during the interethnic conflict in Macedonia. 
Because Boskovski holds dual Macedonian-Croatian citizenship, The Hague court could potentially require guarantees from both countries. Croatian Justice Minister Vesna Skare-Ozbolt has said authorities in Zagreb are willing to comply. 
According to Vlado Kambovski, a professor of criminal law at the University of Skopje, the Judicial Council of The Hague tribunal will assess a number of issues, including flight risk and the possiblity that the defendants could exert influence on witnesses, before making a decision on release. 
While welcomed by nationalist groups within Macedonia, the government's decision to provide the guarantees has provoked criticism from others, who say that it amounts to a show of official support for war crimes indictees. Furthermore, the move came after a controversial court ruling last month in another case involving Boskovski. 
On 22 April, a Skopje court acquitted three former police officers and a businessman of the 2002 murder of seven immigrants, citing insufficient evidence. Prosecutors had charged that the victims were killed in a staged shootout on Boskovski's orders, with the goal of convincing the West that Macedonia was fighting al-Qaeda terrorists. 
Boskovski was also indicted in connection with the deaths, but fled to Croatia before he could be brought to justice. He was later extradited to The Hague. 
