17/06/2004
(UN News Centre, Reuters, AP, Xinhua, Radio B92, Tanjug - 16/06/04)
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan has decided to appoint Soren Jessen-Petersen of Denmark as his new special representative for Kosovo and UNMIK chief, replacing veteran Finnish diplomat Harri Holkeri in both posts.
UN spokesman Stephane Dujarric said on Wednesday (16 June) that Annan had informed the Security Council of his plans. The 15-nation body is expected to approve the nomination within days, clearing the way for the Dane to start work shortly afterwards.
A veteran international civil servant, Jessen-Petersen would become Kosovo's fifth UN governor since June 1999, when the province was placed under UN administration following NATO's 78-day campaign to drive out Serb forces.
About four months ago Jessen-Petersen was appointed EU special representative to Macedonia. Previously he worked in various senior roles with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and the UN Secretariat.
Holkeri, who replaced Germany's Michael Steiner about ten months ago, announced his resignation on 25 May, citing health reasons.
"The Secretary General would like to take this opportunity to express his deep appreciation for the dedicated service and leadership provided by Harri Holkeri in often very difficult circumstances," Dujarric said Wednesday.
In mid-March, Kosovo was shaken by the worst clashes between ethnic Albanians and Serbs in the past five years. Two days of riots across the province left 19 dead and hundreds wounded. About 800 Serb homes and dozens of religious sites were destroyed or damaged.
At a farewell press conference in Pristina last week, Holkeri described the mid-March events as a major setback for Kosovo and called on the international community to continue its efforts to stabilise the province.
"If the international community gives up here, that would be a carte blanche for terrorism, for violence, all kind of actions against humanity," Holkeri said.
A report by Serbian state news agency Tanjug on Wednesday quoted KFOR Commander General Holger Kammerhoff as saying that NATO peacekeepers would not allow a new flare-up of violence in Kosovo. But the situation remains very sensitive, he added.
Kosovo Albanians, who account for about 90 per cent of the province's population of two million, are pushing for independence from Serbia. By contrast, Kosovo Serbs insist that the province must remain part of Serbia-Montenegro.
The international community has listed a set of standards Kosovo must achieve as a precondition for opening talks on its future status. A decision to that end will be made following a review of the progress in implementing the standards, likely in mid-2005.
In other news, UNMIK police spokesman Niraj Singh was quoted as saying Wednesday that a total of 270 people have been arrested so far in connection with the mid-March riots. Four ethnic Albanians reportedly have been indicted over killings during the clashes.
