17/02/2010
By Linda Karadaku for Southeast European Times from Pristina -- 17/02/10
Below the landscape of Kosovo is over 10 billion tonnes of the fossil fuel lignite -- often called "brown coal" -- yet so far only 250m tonnes have been mined. Justina Shiroka-Pula, Kosovo's minister for Energy and Mines, told SETimes that reducing the pollution that comes with burning lignite could be done with thermo technology based on the latest European designs. 
 SETimes: Does Kosovo have a plan for developing its own energy resources? 
 Justina Shiroka-Pula: The Kosovo government approved in September 2009 [a strategy] for energy for the period 2009-2018. This strategy foresees the development of … resources in order to secure an electricity power supply. The supply will [come from] the exploitation of lignite burned in thermo power plants. We also foresee the development of recycled resources, such as energy from wind and solar energy. Kosovo is building and promoting the first wind turbines in the region. 
 SETimes: At what phase of construction is the thermo-power plant Kosova e Re? And what will its impact be on the nation's economy? 
 Shiroka-Pula: The project is in the phase of selecting potential investors. The deadline is February 26th 2010. Based on standard procedures [along with] public criteria and a transparent process, companies capable of carrying out a project like this will be considered. 
The [plant] will have an initial capacity of 500MW with an option of [adding] 500MW later. Such big projects can take five years to build. The Kosovo economy will undoubtedly profit from such a new generator, especially if we take into consideration the closing of the thermo-power plant "Kosovo A" in 2017 and the increased demand for energy in those years. 
 SETimes: What can you tell us about the mine at Sibovc? 
 Shiroka-Pula: The Sibovc mine is the best asset of all the lignite reserves in Kosovo. It will be a corporation with shares and have joint ownership [between] Kosovo and other shareholders. Lignite is a [natural resource of] Kosovo and it will be valued at the maximum. Implementation of the project itself will depend on the interest of the investor and Kosovo. 
 SETimes: Which is the status of the Trepca mining complex near Mitrovica? 
 Shiroka-Pula: Trepca is [now] a public enterprise. Some mines there are operating and last year had an increase in production. Lead and zinc are extracted from Trepca mines and after flotation are exported as concentrate. Trepca is [envisioned] for restructuring for possible privatisation. 
 SETimes: How dangerous is pollution from the burning of lignite? 
 Shiroka-Pula: Using fuel for transportation and also for the production of electricity has a considerable impact on the environment. Reducing this impact through the burning of lignite in big furnaces at modern thermo plants requires adequate technology. Thermo plants older than 40 years will be operating until 2017. They operate according to the criteria of the time they were designed and built. 
 SETimes: When will Kosovo finally supply the entire country with electricity 24-hours a day? 
 Shiroka-Pula: Non-stop supply with electricity does not depend only on the production of energy. More so, it depends on the control of supply and distribution. Only energy systems in which what is used is [completely] paid for supply consumers without interruption. 
