11/06/2010
By Erol Izmirli for Southeast European Times -- 11/06/10 
Turkey joined Brazil on Wednesday (June 9th) in opposing Security Council Resolution 1929, which imposes new sanctions against Iran over its nuclear programme. The two countries recently brokered a nuclear swap deal with the regime in Tehran, and appeared to be trying to keep their diplomatic initiative on track. 
 "We have supported the idea of solving the Iranian issue by diplomacy since the beginning [of the nuclear row], and as such, voted against at the Security Council on Wednesday, " Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan said on Thursday. 
Twelve of the other Security Council members voted for the sanctions, while one -- Lebanon -- abstained. 
 Erdogan spoke by phone with US President Barack Obama hours before the vote took place, informing him of Ankara's decision to oppose the resolution. He has also decided to send a high-level delegation to Washington on June 14th. 
"Turkey's 'no' vote does not target the United States," the daily Hurriyet quoted Mehmet Yegin, of the Ankara-based International Studies Research Organisation, as saying. "Turkey had to stand behind the deal it brokered as a requirement of pursuing a consistent policy." 
 However, he added, the decision "certainly will have a price". 
 "I won't conceal the fact that we're disappointed with the vote that took place today," US Undersecretary for Political Affairs Bill Burns said at a press briefing Wednesday, summing up the mood in Washington. 
Obama, during his visit to Ankara in April 2009, described ties between his country and Turkey as a model partnership. But the two nations have been at odds over how to deal with the Iranian nuclear threat. Washington -- along with fellow Vienna Group members France and Russia -- say the swap deal negotiated by Turkey and Brazil does not go far enough to allay concerns. 
Turkey, which shares a border with Iran, has sizeable economic interests in that country. Around 15% of Turkish natural gas is supplied by Iran and the trade volume between the two countries has reached $10 billion. 
Ankara says sanctions are putting the brakes on trade, and thus impacting the Turkish economy. "Turkey and Iran's trade volume … can rise to $30 billion if sanctions are lifted," Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu said in an interview with Kanal24 late Wednesday. 
Despite this, diplomatic sources in Turkey say the country will implement UN Security Council resolutions, especially given its current status as a non-permanent member of the Council. 
The latest sanctions add 40 companies and one individual to a list of those subject to an asset freeze, including 15 controlled or acting on behalf of Iran's Revolutionary Guard. 
It urges countries to co-operate in inspections of vessels suspected of carrying prohibited cargo, and calls on them to block financial transactions if there are reasonable grounds to believe activities could contribute to Iranian nuclear activities. 
