08/07/2010
(SeeNews, Blitz.bg - 01/07/10; Mediafax, B92 - 30/06/10; Freedom House, RFE/RL - 29/06/10)
Unlike most of the non-Baltic former Soviet states, those in the Balkans have made some progress in democratic development over the past decade, Freedom House concluded in a new study released on June 29th. 
"In terms of population, nearly 80% of residents of the former Soviet Union -- 221 million people -- still live in entrenched authoritarian settings, where they are deprived of basic political rights," the US-based watchdog noted in its annual Nations in Transit report. 
 It cited Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and Macedonia as some of the Balkan countries that "have made steady gains in civil society, electoral process" and other areas in the past decade. 
The study assesses the state of democratic governance in 2009 for 29 countries from Central Europe to Eurasia on the basis of developments in seven different categories. These include electoral process, civil society, independent media, national and local governance, judicial independence and corruption. 
The countries are divided into three groups: new EU members, including Bulgaria and Romania; non-Baltic former Soviet states; and the Balkans, comprised of Albania, BiH, Croatia, Kosovo, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia. 
Each of the countries is given an overall democracy score, based on a scale from 1 to 7, with 1 signifying the highest level of democratic development, and 7 the lowest. That score represents the average of the marks each nation has received in the individual categories. 
 Only five countries -- Belarus, Kosovo, Lithuania, Macedonia and Serbia -- slightly improved their overall democracy scores in 2009, while those of another 14, including Albania, BiH and Romania, were lower than in the previous edition of the Nations in Transit report. 
"Countries throughout the former Soviet Union and Central and Eastern Europe suffered declines in their democratic institutions," Freedom House said in a statement. 
Only eight of the surveyed countries -- all EU members -- received total scores lower than the 2.99 maximum to be considered "consolidated democracies". Bulgaria, whose rating remained unchanged at 3.04, and Romania, rated at 3.46 in this year's report, down from 3.36 in the previous one, continue to "confront deep corruption and other institutional challenges, and are therefore classified as semi-consolidated democracies," Freedom House said. 
Croatia and Serbia, rated at 3.71 each, Macedonia and Montenegro, both scoring 3.79 this year, as well as Albania, with 3.93, also belonged to that group. 
BiH saw its overall democracy rating significantly improve, from 5.17 in 2001 to 4.04 in 2007. The deterioration in the political climate in recent years has led to a new minor decline in its score, 4.25 in the new report. Based on this, BiH has been classified as a "transitional government or hybrid regime", along with Ukraine and Georgia, both rated at between 4.00 and 4.99. 
Kosovo experienced modest improvement in 2009, Freedom House said in the report, giving the country an overall democracy score of 5.07, which places it in the group of the "semi-consolidated authoritarian regimes" with scores from 5.00 to 5.99, together with Moldova and Armenia. 
"If the EU remains without a clear strategy towards each country in the region, especially Serbia, BiH might easily end up on the road to slow dissolution, isolation, and further economic disarray, with a latent potential for the repetition of violence," the watchdog group warned. 
