20/07/2011
By Mirjana Boskovic for Southeast European Times in Podgorica -- 20/07/11
Hunger strikes have been on the rise as a means for Montenegrins to effectively exert pressure on employers and the government to claim back salaries, unpaid contributions, benefits, and accrue seniority. 
"It turns out hunger striking is the only way to achieve our rights. It does not exist in the labour law, it is not covered, but it is the only way to solve something," Federation of Trade Unions of Montenegro (SSCG) employee Vukadin Cupic told SETimes. 
Since the beginning of the year, several hundred people throughout Montenegro have gone on hunger strikes, triggering debate over the protest method and the role of government. 
Tobacco producer Duvankomerc's former and current workers, for example, called off a six-day hunger strike only after being paid part of their back salaries. They were given appropriate government assurances to be paid the rest upon completing the sale of company assets. 
Many others have chosen the same path at the steel plant Zeljezara, the former construction company Prvoborac in Herceg Novi, and the Niksic city bakery Nikpek. 
In the town of Bijelo Polje, the disabled turned to hunger striking to fight for their rights. 
Even some SSCG employees decided on hunger strikes to force management to pay late salaries. 
Workers who hunger strike say they have no other choice to achieve their demands, as any other means of protest yields slow results, if any. 
"Employers and government like to correspond and negotiate, but not solve anything," Cupic said. 
Union leaders, however, take exception. They argue people's health should not be sacrificed to achieve something which belongs to the workers under the law. 
"I am always for that way of struggle but not for [potentially] sacrificing one's life. I am aware people are losing patience and certain problems' solutions linger for years, but still, I do not support the most extreme methods, which may endanger people," SSCG General Secretary Zoran Masonicic told the Podgorica daily Vijesti. 
Moreover, union leaders say former and current workers have at their disposal laws and legal institutions to protect their rights before embracing any kind of protest. 
"They certainly have labour inspection and the Agency for Peaceful Resolution of Labour Disputes," a Labour and Social Welfare Ministry spokesperson told SETimes. 
Illustrative of this is the example of workers in Prvoborac, who ended their hunger strike after labour inspection intervened. 
Workers welcome the news, but argue that in a large number of cases they must draw attention to problems affecting their very livelihood by utilising hunger strikes. They say union power has weakened and there are hardly any other ways to oppose employers. 
Government is viewed by some as the last refuge for solving such questions, though officials caution that what is at times demanded of them may interfere in the competency of judicial institutions, particularly in bankruptcy cases. 
"They do not show understanding towards workers or citizens given that the state is obliged to care for them," Cupic said, referring to government officials. 
"We are forced to endanger our lives and health," he concluded. 
