30/06/2004
By Mustafa Azizoglu for Southeast European Times in Istanbul - 30/06/04
The 17th summit of NATO heads of state and government ended Tuesday (29 June) in Istanbul. Among the most important agreements reached during the two-day event were the decision to launch a training programme for Iraqi security forces and a commitment to boost troop levels in Afghanistan.
Leaders of the 26-member Alliance welcomed Monday's handover of power from US-led coalition forces to Iraqi authorities, two days earlier than expected. They agreed to help the Iraqi government train its security forces and offered co-operation to the Middle East region in general.
Agreement was reached despite continuing differences over NATO's role, with French President Jacques Chirac insisting that training be conducted by Alliance members under their own flags, not NATO's. "There's no point in us standing here and saying, 'All the previous disagreements have disappeared.' They haven't," said British Prime Minister Tony Blair. Nevertheless, the summit has paved the way for NATO's first mission in Iraq.
Alliance leaders also agreed to provide an additional 3,500 troops for the 6,500-strong International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan. Afghan President Hamid Karzai attended the final summit session and appealed to NATO to send extra peacekeepers immediately to help improve security in his country ahead of the September presidential and legislative ballots. "The Afghan people need that security today, not tomorrow," he said.
While in Istanbul, US President George W. Bush addressed students at Galatasaray University. Against the backdrop of the Ortakoy Mosque and the Bosphorus Bridge, which links Europe and Asia, he answered criticism of his policies and sought to reassure Muslim nations.
"Some people in Muslim cultures identify democracy with the worst of Western popular culture and want no part of it," he said. "When I speak about the blessings of liberty, coarse videos and crass commercialism are not what I have in mind. There is nothing incompatible between democratic values and high standards of decency," Bush said.
He also strongly backed Turkey's bid to join the EU. "As a European power, Turkey belongs in the Union," Bush said. "Your membership would also be a crucial advance in relations between the Muslim world and the West, because you are part of both."
In other developments at the summit, NATO leaders agreed that the SFOR mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be handed over to an EU force by the end of the year. Three countries hoping to join the Alliance -- Albania, Croatia and Macedonia -- were praised for their recent progress, but did not receive an indication as to when they might become NATO members.
