01/12/2011
By Jonilda Koçi for Southeast European Times in Tirana -- 01/12/11
Twenty years ago, when Albania emerged from decades of communism, it was one of the region's most severely centralised state economies, lacking market and competition principles. Implementation of a free and open competitive environment -- the heart of the free market economy --is a must as the country receives increasing attention from the EU. 
Created seven years ago, the independent Albanian Competition Authority focuses on promoting free and effective competition issues. It levied several millions of euros in fines for anti-corruption practices and price fixing. 
In an interview with SETimes, Lindita Milo (Lati), Albanian Competition Authority president, explains restraints her organisation faces. 
 SETimes: What is the structure of the Albanian market in terms of effective and free competition? What are the most concentrated or monopolized industries based on ACA's investigations? 
Milo (Lati): The Albanian economy can be considered a small economy, not only by market size, but also by the size of firms -- 98% have fewer than 20 employees. This affects the number of operators in a particular market because they can make effective use of resources. 
[We've] observed that as a result of opening markets or privatisation, in liberalised markets, major firms in mobile telephony, insurance and banking (which predominate the Albanian economy) lost market share. 
But in markets such as imported liquid petroleum gases, [we] observed a significant increase in the level of concentration. Other markets had limited competition because of exclusive rights, or [were] characterized by limited natural resources and monopolies. 
 SETimes: How do you see implementation of antitrust laws as they related to cartels, abuse of dominant position, etc? 
 Milo (Lati): Effective enforcement of the law is based on two approaches: a) the exercise of power that gives us the law and b) fostering law enforcement. The authority uses all the power and instruments given by the legislator. This is more evident if we refer to the penalties the commission has given, from fines to firms that refused to grant requested information, to fines of several million euros for anti-competitive practices. 
In the last five years I have been chairing the commission, we have intervened in order to promote free and effective competition in highly concentrated markets when some operator has been fined for violations. We have investigated different firms that had dominant position in certain products or market segments such as the commissions for treasury bills or loading and unloading of liquid petroleum gases. 
We have also investigated and sanctioned firms for anti-competitive practices in the form of prohibited agreements such as price fixing, or concerted practices in liberalised markets, but the main firms agreed [to] limiting effective competition. 
 SETimes: How do you see competition legislation in Albania and its implementation? Do you think the implementation of competition laws and regulations is still weak in Albania, taking into account the fact that fines are still under procedure from the Bailiff's office? 
 Milo (Lati): The competition authority is one of the institutions that guarantees fair play in the markets. It protects companies and consumers from anti-competitive behaviour from powerful players who want to distort free and [fair] competition. But the authority is not the only institution in charge. The efficiency of the authority is conditioned by the activity of other market institutions, which represent a system in itself. [The] competition authority is one of the gears of this system. 
Though discussed publicly for several years, determining the institution in charge of [the] collection of fines imposed by the authority has proved problematic because of legislative changes. These problems have been solved with the approvals of amendments in the law on competition protection and administrative offences. Both laws [were] approved in 2010. [It] is now is up to the Bailiff's Office of Tirana to do the rest. It is very important that companies see decisions of the authority are being implemented. This will help to increase the competition culture. 
SETimes: What are [the] main challenges regarding the revisions of the competition commission's decisions by district and appeal courts? 
 Milo (Lati): [The] experiences of the authority with the court are sometimes positive and sometimes negative. Problems with the judiciary are well known, especially the length of proceedings. There is also a lack of familiarity of competition issues with judges new to the Albanian justice system. We are pleased that things are moving and judges can refer to decisions already taken from the Court of Appeals to have a clearer view [of] the competition law. 
SETimes: How is the competition situation in Albania compared with other countries in the region? 
 Milo (Lati): Albania and other countries [in] the region are in an intensive process of Europeanisation and facing the reforming process of economic, political and social environments to fulfill European integration criteria. We are rapidly increasing cross-border trade and commerce, private capital, foreign direct investment by multi-national corporations and deregulation of previously state-owned or controlled sectors. 
Practices that can stifle competition have become more visible, particularly where government monopoly has been replaced by private monopoly. Our economies are similar in terms of GDP and in the process of liberalisation. We are facing the same challenges. We are co-operating with each other and share a number of experiences [in order] to learn from most experienced countries. 
