30/08/2011
By Biljana Lajmanovska for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 30/08/11
Four years ago, the Macedonian government pronounced Ramadan-Bayram -- the three-day Islamic observance that ends the month-long Ramadan fast -- a state holiday. 
"It is a non-working holiday for everybody equally for the first time since the first quarter of the 20th century, including for Christians and atheists," Bitola mufti Plumi Vеliu told SETimes. 
In Reka, a region along the River Radika in the country's West, the Muslim community observes the holiday as it has done for centuries. 
It begins with a morning prayer, followed by a visit to the graves of ancestors. Members of the community honour the oldest members by kissing their hands. Congratulations are exchanged. 
The three-day spirit of celebration includes visits to friends and family, with the younger generation calling on their seniors. Tasty meals are served, including the traditional 'Bayram meat' (lamb), baklava and valangii, a phyllo-like pastry. 
"In Bitola, people visit each other for Ramadan-Bayram. At my house, besides visits by family and friends, I am frequently visited by Christians who come to congratulate me," Vеliu said. 
The former grand mufti of Macedonia's Islamic Community, Jakup Selimovski, said that ethnic Macedonians -- though predominantly Orthodox Christian and fiercely loyal to the Macedonian Orthodox Church -- are increasingly becoming familiar with the Islamic faith and its holidays. 
Macedonian politicians, he added, have now begun to follow the example of their Western colleagues by organising Iftar dinners to honour the Islamic Community. 
"There is even a group of intellectuals who are interested in the serious study of Islam," Selimovski told SETimes. 
The Islamic Community, he added, is increasing its efforts to reach out to people of other faiths. "During the Holy month, we organised Iftar dinners and invited the non-Muslims as well," Selimovski said. 
Macedonia's decision to recognise Ramadan-Bayram did not sit well with everyone, however. Some argue that the state has no business commemorating religious events, and that such celebrations divide society rather than bringing it together. 
"Religious holidays are celebrations of one group of citizens. ... We should celebrate those days which mean something for all of us," sociologist Ilija Aceski told SETimes. 
Many disagree. They say the recognition of Ramadan-Bayram is fostering the return of a longstanding Balkan tradition during which the major holidays such as Christmas and Ramadan-Bayram were a time of joyful celebration for all. 
"Today, practically the entire state lives in the spirit of Bayram on August 30th," Veliu said. 
