27/12/2007
By Goran Trajkov for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 27/12/07
To increase the number of computer and internet users in Macedonia, the government has been implementing a programme called "Macedonia: Country of Computer Experts". The country currently has few computer and internet users, mostly because of low living standards and the high cost of computers and internet use. 
"The 21st century is centred on digital literacy, internet and global networking. We cannot afford to allow the digital gap to broaden between Macedonia and the world economies," said Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski, explaining the need for the programme. 
The programme has three main components. In its first phase, university seniors were given vouchers worth 200 euros. They were able to use these towards a computer purchase. According to the ministry of education, an estimated 10,000 seniors received the vouchers. 
The vouchers were redeemable at any registered computer store, but had to be used by December 15th. The ministry of interior and the ministry of finance voided the unused coupons to prevent fraud. 
Meanwhile, the government has been organising free IT courses, available to anyone who would like to attend. 
Lastly, steps are being taken to make free internet access available to every citizen. In all, 200 free internet cafes will be opened throughout the country, with 50 already in operation. 
Alternately, free dial up connections will be available to all homes, and internet tax and phone fees will be waived. 
Although the government's campaign has the potential to transform Macedonia's digital landscape, it has also come in for some criticism due to apparent shortcomings. 
For example, many households cannot take advantage of the free dialup service because they do not have the phone lines necessary to access the internet. 
Students, meanwhile, say the voucher programme did not cover them adequately. Many could not afford to pay the difference between the value of the voucher and the actual cost of the computer. While a secondhand computer and monitor can be purchased for 200 euros, the vouchers were only valid for new computers. 
A better approach, the students argue, would be for the vouchers to cover the full price of the cheapest computer available. 
A similar campaign, aimed at acquiring 150,000 personal computers for elementary schools and high schools in the country, was launched in September. It ran into some of the same problems. Just as the lack of home phone lines limits the number of users who can take advantage of free dialup, many schools are not equipped to connect to the internet. 
