15/08/2005
(Blic - 15/08/05; Beta, Radio B92 - 14/08/05; AP - 12/08/05)
Opposition politicians in Serbia have blasted the recent withdrawal of legal charges against Slobodan Milosevic's son, charging that the move is part of a political deal made by the government of Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica. 
"The dropping of charges against Marko Milosevic is part of a political trade with the Socialist Party of Serbia (SPS)," Aleksander Vlahovic of Serbian President Boris Tadic's Democratic Party (DS) said in an interview the Belgrade-based daily <I>Blic</I> carried Monday (15 August). 
The ruling coalition, which lacks a parliamentary majority, relies on the "silent support" of Milosevic's SPS. An earlier withdrawal of legal charges against Milosevic's wife, Mira, was also rumoured to be politically motivated. 
Marko Milosevic, who is believed to be hiding in Russia, was sentenced in absentia by a court in his parents' hometown of Pozarevac to six months in jail for threatening an activist of the Otpor movement, which opposed his father's regime. Earlier this month, however, Zoran Milovanovic retreated from his initial account of the event. Several days later all charges against the former Yugoslav ruler's son were withdrawn. 
Milovanovic's retraction came soon after his mother had written to Kostunica and Tadic saying her family was again receiving death threats and could no longer cope. 
On Friday, Tadic called on State Prosecutor Slobodan Jankovic to examine the legality of the withdrawal of the charges and issue a report to the public. Jankovic returns from his summer holiday Monday. 
Nenad Konstantinovic, a member of the DS executive board, said Jankovic should respond to the party's questions by Tuesday and also clarify if he had been in contact with the justice minister and other officials in connection with the case. If he fails to do so, the party would seek his resignation, Konstantinovic said. 
"Apparently the law that applies to others does not apply to Marko Milosevic and Mira Markovic," Belgrade-based Radio B92 quoted Konstantinovic as saying Friday. 
Local media speculate that those developments are meant to facilitate a Milosevic family reunion in The Hague, where Slobodan Milosevic is on trial. 
Meanwhile, Serbian Capital Investments Minister Velimir Ilic denied allegations that he had intervened in the case. He said he had only suggested to Milovanovic that he "forgive" the former Yugoslav president's son. 
"I told Milovanovic: 'If you want to -- take the arrest warrant off his back ... Let bygones be bygones, let him go and see his father'," the minister told Radio-Television Serbia. 
Serbian Finance Minister Mladjan Dinkic, a leading member of ruling coalition member G17 Plus, described the dropping of charges against Marko Milosevic as a "shameful" act and a blow to the pro-democracy forces in Serbia. If Jankovic is found to have intervened in the case, the party will demand his resignation, the minister said Friday. G17 Plus will also request a meeting of the governing coalition to discuss the case. 
