05/05/2006
(AP, AFP, UPI, AKI, ANA-MPA, HINA, Makfax, Turkish Press, Bulgarian Government Web Site - 04/05/06)
The heads of state or government of the countries in the South-East European Co-operation Process (SEECP) voiced their commitment Thursday (4 May) to Euro-Atlantic integration, enhancing ties with the EU and boosting overall regional co-operation. 
"We are working to transform the region into a European area of stability, co-operation and prosperity," said a declaration adopted at the summit. Dubbed "Together in Europe", the statement described EU accession as a primary goal of countries in the region. 
The SEECP, created during a meeting in Sofia in 1996, includes Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Macedonia, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro and Turkey. Moldova, which has been attending the SEECP meetings as an observer, was accepted on Wednesday as a full-fledged member of the now ten-nation group. 
Greece is the only EU member among them. Bulgaria and Romania are scheduled to join the Union in January 2007, while Croatia and Turkey began their membership talks in October. Macedonia is awaiting a start date for its own accession negotiations, while Albania, BiH and Serbia-Montenegro are in earlier phases of the EU integration process. 
Participants in the Thessaloniki summit agreed that negotiations on the expansion of the Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA), which currently includes Bulgaria, Croatia, Macedonia and Romania, should be completed by the end of September. The new free trade pact would include also Albania, BiH, Moldova, Serbia-Montenegro and the province of Kosovo, and would replace a labyrinth of existing bilateral free trade agreements. 
The leaders also agreed on the need for an institutional strengthening of the SEECP to ensure that it is able to take up some of the responsibilities of the Stability Pact, address issues that directly concern and affect the region, and enhance its EU prospects. 
On Thursday, the transport ministers of the SEECP member countries signed a rail agreement in Thessaloniki setting the stage for the creation of a regional network in a quadrant of Europe notorious for substandard rail services, the Greek news agency ANA-MPA reported. The agreement foresees the development of a total of 16 rail axes in the Balkans, reducing travel times and speeding up border checks via hi-tech on-board police and customs screening. 
A number of bilateral meetings were held on the sidelines of the summit, including between the prime ministers of Greece and Turkey, Costas Karamanlis and Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Noting the improved dialogue between Athens and Ankara in recent years, the two leaders agreed on the need for further improvement in bilateral ties, and set $5 billion as a target for the volume of bilateral trade in the coming years. 
The Thessaloniki summit also marked the end of Greece's chairmanship of the SEECP. Croatia will be at the helm of the organisation until May 2007, when the rotating one-year chairmanship is assumed by Bulgaria. 
