16/06/2005
By Davor Konjikusic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/06/05
Serbs' ability to travel to EU countries is restricted by tight visa regimes -- an issue that affects businesspeople, students and ordinary tourists. Many are hoping to see these requirements relaxed. But Belgrade is still a long way from meeting one of the key requirements -- the transfer of border control from the army to the police. 
According to most current estimates, Serbia will need more than two years to accomplish this transfer. The army and interior ministry signed a memorandum on handover of control at the beginning of this year, with the process starting at the Serbian-Hungarian border. However, it has not progressed further. 
Federal Defence Minister Prvoslav Davinic is the highest-level official responsible for the border control issue. He remains optimistic, insisting that the transfer can be completed in a year's time. "We'll go one step at a time, for the police will not be able to assume control of the whole border, not because of professionalism, but because of finance. This costs a lot," Davinic says. 
But money isn't the only problem, others argue. "One of the plans was for [the transfer] to be completed by the end of the year, but many plans here are not accomplished within such short deadlines, and it is unlikely that this second part of securing the state border will be realised," says the head of the border control police, Dusan Zlokas. "Along the borders with former Yugoslav republics, we do not have buildings that we can use, i.e. in which police stations would be located." 
It will take around 6,000 personnel to secure the state border, according to police estimates. While the army currently secures a narrow part of the border, the job of the police will be slightly different. "In contrast to the army, which primarily had a role of defence, the police will be tasked with preventing terrorist attacks, terrorist penetration, prevention of cross-border crime, illegal immigration and human trafficking," Zlokas explains. The European Agency for Reconstruction and Development is financing the reconstruction of particular border crossings and the training of border police. 
The EU plans to deliver a total of 10m euros' worth of equipment for the border police, Srdjan Staletovic of the European Agency for Reconstruction told the Southeast European Times. "The border police, as a recent discipline in Serbia, is inadequately equipped, that is to say it still needs to be equipped in accordance with European standards ... This and next year, the EU will deliver through the European Agency for Reconstruction sophisticated equipment required for X-ray control of goods at border crossings, for adequate control of travel documents, as well as control of the green and blue lines. In other words, for the complete securing of borders around Serbia." Staletovic said. 
Montenegro completed the entire process back in 2003. In its Feasibility Study for the state union, however, the EU indicated it is concerned about the lack of a state-level body charged with overseeing border control. 
