19/10/2007
(Office of the High Representative, DPA - 19/10/07; Fena, Office of the High Representative - 18/10/07)
High Representative Miroslav Lajcak on Friday (October 19th) outlined a set of measures aimed at healing the "ailing" state system in Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) and strengthening the functionality of its institutions.
Announcing them as the first step in a process towards achieving that goal, he called for changes to the Law on the Council of Ministers of BiH and to the Rules of Procedure on the work of both houses of the state parliament, as well as measures to improve the co-ordination within the ruling coalition. If Bosnian politicians fail to implement the proposed amendments by December 1st, he said, he would have no other choice but to impose them and probably sanction those who have rejected them. 
The proposed measures are aimed at facilitating the decision making process within the government and parliament and reducing obstructions in the making and passing of laws. Their enactment would allow the government to take decisions even when some of its members have decided not to attend the meeting, a practice frequently seen in the past on the part of those seeking to block a certain decision. 
"It is clear that Bosnia and Herzegovina does not function in a proper way. It does not function as a healthy, normal state," Lajcak said at Friday's press conference in Sarajevo. "The goal of the international community … is to change this -- and change it to the better. We cannot consider our mission complete until changes are made in the direction of establishing a stable, European, democratic, multiethnic society in Bosnia and Herzegovina." 
The best way for achieving that goal would be through European integration, but Bosnian politicians' failure to reach the EU-required agreement on police reform has hampered the country's progress on that road, thus choosing isolation instead of integration, he noted. 
"Last Thursday, [the politicians] showed definitely and clearly that they were not ready … and they would not, or could not, go towards Europe," Lajcak said. "It is clear to everyone that not all sides had the good will to find a solution for police reform in the framework of the European principles. It is also obvious that, regardless of conscious and voluntary commitments they have made, it is not possible to make the necessary agreement for this today or tomorrow." 
The EU gave Bosnian political leaders until October 15th to reach a deal on police reform, in order for the country's Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with the 27-nation bloc to be signed by the end of this year. Following their failure to meet that requirement, the finalisation of the key accord -- considered a major first step towards eventual EU membership -- could be delayed by at least a year. 
"Nobody can be forced to go on the European road -- it goes against the European integration philosophy," said Lajcak. "Until the local politicians decide that they want to take you that way, it remains closed for you, although Europe is ready and waiting." 
But as it is the international community's responsibility, as well as his own wish, to work on strengthening the Balkan nation, a new approach needs to be found to turn into a stable, modern and democratic state. 
"Because agreements cannot be made and solutions found, work of the institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina is blocked. Decisions are not made, laws are not adopted," Lajcak stressed, noting that only three reform laws had been adopted in the past 12 months. Only one of them was related to EU integration. 
"I think the current situation illustrates the fact that I am no longer asked when will we enter the EU, but when will you remove the people we have elected," the top international envoy further noted. "Today's measures do not abolish anybody's rights or responsibilities. The only people who can feel endangered by this are those who believe that they have the right to undermine the functioning of this country." 
