12/02/2007
By Blerta Foniqi-Kabashi for Southeast European Times in Pristina – 12/02/07
Kosovo Albanian leaders appealed for calm on Sunday (February 11th) following the death of two people during a protest Saturday. The demonstration was staged by the militant group Vetevendosja , which opposes the UN-led process of determining Kosovo's status and wants the province's Parliament to declare independence immediately. 
Violence broke out when the 3,000 demonstrators clashed with police. UN and Kosovo police officers used tear gas and rubber bullets against those trying to break through barricades around the parliament building in Pristina. 
During a meeting Sunday, Kosovo President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Agim Ceku and opposition leaders issued a statement condemning the violence. The statement called on "all Kosovo citizens to contribute to the stability of the country, as they have done so far." 
Events such as Saturday's violence may have negative consequences for the process of forming the state of Kosovo, they warned. 
 "I assure the Kosovo people that the process is going in the right direction and very soon Kosovo will be independent. These acts are only damaging the process," Ceku said. 
 "It is totally regrettable that two lives were lost as a result of wanton breach of security at the government buildings," UN police chief Stephen Curtis said. The police were compelled to take "defensive measures to restore order", he said. 
Vetevendosja leader Albin Kurti said police provoked the protestors. "So many cords of police blockaded the roads … [they] let us know that they were prepared to intervene," Kurti said after the two-hour demonstration. 
Kurti said that they did not ask for permission from police to organise the protest, because if their request were rejected, they would have had to cancel it. 
"We are protesting because Ahtisaari wants to return Kosovo under Serbia's authority and this is unacceptable for us," said Lulzim Berisha, who protested on Saturday. "Anything that is less than independence and sovereignty is unacceptable," his friend, Artan Gashi said. 
Kosovo's leaders have accepted Ahtisaari's plan, while Belgrade has rejected it. The proposal would allow Kosovo to choose national symbols, adopt a constitution and seek international recognition, while an international military and civilian presence would be maintained to ensure peace and stability. 
