26/04/2010
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 26/04/10
The Constitutional Court on Thursday (April 22nd) ruled out the possibility of extending the functions of the National Integrity Agency (ANI) -- a key anti-corruption institution, responsible for monitoring the assets of senior officials and identifying conflicts of interests. 
In its ruling, the court also stated that the obligation to publish a declaration of assets and interests on the internet was an infringement of the "right to respect and privacy by exposing in an unjustified manner the above mentioned data". 
The court also said that the agency has acted beyond its scope as an investigative body, not observing the principle of "innocent until proven guilty". 
Following these events, European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso voiced concern about the possibility of weakening the ANI's role. 
After talks in Brussels with Romanian President Traian Basescu, Barroso said that "the agency needs a firm legal basis to guarantee full independence and the ability to conduct proper investigations." Basescu announced that the government will issue a decree ensuring that ANI can continue its activity. But the Constitutional Court immediately responded the government could only propose a draft law. 
Romanian politicians and NGOs mobilised in support of the ANI days after the Constitutional Court verdict. 
Acting on a complaint by former Social Democrat Senator Serban Bradisteanu -- whose assets are under investigation -- the court ruled that the two chapters of law regulating the ANI's activity are unconstitutional. 
 Following that decision, the ANI can no longer round up wealth statements, issue fines for late submissions or seek the confiscation or freezing of assets, the Prosecutor's Office said. The personal wealth and interest statements will be off -limits to the public. 
Founded in 2007, the ANI became the first agency with such prerogatives in the EU. 
The Romanian media was quick to reveal that the controversial verdict came amid a series of investigations ANI was conducting on the assets of seven of the nine Constitutional Court judges. 
 "The Constitutional Court's decision is contestable from many viewpoints. Seven of the nine judges have been in flagrant conflict of interest. According to the ANI, they encroached upon the wealth control law by either failing to declare bank accounts they have at home or abroad, or share-holding at various firms," Silviu Sergiu, senior political editor with the Romanian newspaper Evenimentul Zilei, told SETimes. 
"The National Integrity Agency has been almost suppressed by the Constitutional Court's decision, to the satisfaction of many, but this is a huge disservice to Romania," President Basescu said during a meeting with the government. 
"Romania succeeded in regaining credit in its efforts to eliminate the safeguard clause on justice and reduce the monitoring period, the phase we are in now, thanks to ANI's activity," Basescu said. 
 "Those who think they can make fun of ANI are mistaken," Prime Minister Emil Boc said. "The institution must function because it is necessary to Romania, Romanians, and the credibility efforts towards the EU." 
NGOs lambasted the court's verdict. "It is a disaster. They are aiming to transfer ANI's control powers to law courts which have no economy specialists and are generally overcrowded," Laura Stefan, the anti-corruption specialist of the Romanian Academic Society told Realitatea TV. 
