10/07/2009
By Paul Ciocoiu for Southeast European Times in Bucharest -- 10/07/09
The final shipments of Russian-origin Highly Enriched Uranium (HEU) have been removed from Romania, the US National Nuclear Security Agency Administration (NNSA) announced. 
The shipments, which took part simultaneously in late June, are part of NNSA's Global Threat Reduction Initiative, which also removed all US-origin HEU from Romania last year. NNSA worked in close co-operation with Romania, Russia, the International Atomic Energy Agency and European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom). Romania is the 14th country to have all of its HEU removed. 
The first shipment, containing 23.7kg of spent HEU was loaded on a Russian plane and flown to a secure facility near Chelyabinsk. The second shipment of 30kg of fresh HEU was taken to a second facility near Dimitrovgrad. The security of both shipments was handled by an elite brigade of the Romanian Gendarmerie. 
The HEU, which was used for research purposes, was removed from two reactors in Romania, one in Magurele and one in Pitesti. The two research facilities now use Low Enriched Uranium (LEU). 
In Russia, the HEU will be reprocessed and turned into LEU, removing any possibility it could be used to make a bomb. 
NNSA's Global Threat Reduction Initiative Assistant Deputy Administrator Andrew Bieniawski, who was in Bucharest for the moves, said the quantity of HEU repatriated to Russia was enough to produce two nuclear bombs. 
 He said the operations cost NNSA around $11.5m and were one of the most complex and confidential missions ever undertaken by the US agency. "We are proud Romania set an example in the region," he said. Around 14 similar shipments will take place in the near future in various parts of the world, he added. 
Romania is the first country to remove all of its HEU since US President Barak Obama outlined his commitment to securing all vulnerable nuclear material in the world within four years. It was also the first time that NNSA has shipped HEU by airplane, in an effort to accelerate the process. 
Romania's National Commission for the Nuclear Activity Control President Vajda Borbala said the first steps towards making the two shipments successful date back five years. The process was completed after Romania and Russia signed an agreement that put the shipments in motion. 
The commission is now seeking a new agreement with NNSA to improve the security of the special nuclear materials and radioactive sources. The US agency has also been closely co-operating with Romanian border police to equip them with radiation detection devices. 
The Global Threat Reduction Initiative has identified 4,500kg of HEU around the world that has to be evacuated and stored safely. So far, only 2,200kg have been relocated, enough material to produce over 85 nuclear bombs. 
