09/02/2009
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje – 09/01/09
Macedonia has its sights set on opening membership negotiations with the EU and NATO this year, goals that hinge on two main criteria. One is the country's local and presidential vote, scheduled for March 22nd. The other is a solution to the ongoing name dispute with Greece. Both present serious challenges. 
Election pressure  
The EU has said Macedonia's chance of launching accession talks depends greatly on the March poll. The previous parliamentary elections, in July 2008, were marred by violence and voter fraud. 
"We will do our best, and hopefully, we will have fair and democratic elections," said Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski last month. "We have done everything in our power to create much better conditions for organising fair and democratic voting since the last elections." 
Concerning the presidential elections, all of Macedonia's major parties have announced their nominees. 
George Ivanov, a professor at the University of Skopje, secured the nomination of the ruling VMRO-DPMNE by a landslide margin at the party convention. The main opposition party, SDSM, chose Ljubomir Frckovski, who also enjoys support from the smaller New Social Democrats. 
The ruling ethnic-Albanian party, DUI, nominated Agron Budjaku, a former transport and communications minister. The opposition Albanian party, the DPA, nominated Mirushe Hodza, a professor. She and independent Slagjana Taseva are the two female presidential candidates this year. A third Albanian party, PDP, nominated Nevzat Halili, its former head. 
New Democracy nominated its own leader, Imer Selmani. He served as a minister of health in the VMRO-DPMNE-DPA coalition government of 2006 to 2008. The Liberal Democrats nominated Nano Ruzin, a former ambassador to NATO. The most controversial candidate is former Interior Minister Ljube Boskovski, who spent more than three years in The Hague's custody for alleged war crimes before being acquitted. Boskovski is running as an independent. 
Regardless of the election outcome, the voting will be the focus of international attention. Last fall, EU Enlargement Commissioner noted that Macedonia has made progress towards meeting the eight Copenhagen criteria that have to be fulfilled before membership talks can start, but he noted that the "ninth criterion" -- free and fair elections -- has yet to be met. 
"If these elections do not completely fulfill international standards, I am afraid that it will be a great failure for the country and will postpone its EU integration," EU envoy to Macedonia Ervan Fouere said last week. 
End in sight for name dispute? 
Another key obstacle is the 17-year-old quarrel with Greece over the name "Macedonia". 
The dispute is "an issue that remains", Fouere said. "This is a separate issue from the reforms, and the [European] Commission assessment is done on the basis on the reforms." 
 He added the EU had made it clear that the row with Greece must be resolved to keep Skopje's bid on track. 
The ongoing quarrel has already affected the country's prospects for NATO accession. 
"At the NATO Summit in Bucharest, the Republic of Macedonia did not receive an expected invitation for full-fledged membership. In its annual report, the European Commission did not give its recommendation for the start of accession negotiations with the EU," President Branko Crvenkovski noted. 
Another round of talks with Athens is expected later this month. According to Crvenkovski, however, they are unlikely to bear fruit because the Gruevski administration is currently preoccupied with its lawsuit against Greece at the International Court of Justice. 
Macedonia's complaint at The Hague-based court argues that Greece violated a 1995 interim agreement between the two countries by blocking Skopje's NATO entry bid at the Alliance's Bucharest summit last April. Under Article 11 of the agreement, Greece pledged not to block its neighbour's efforts to join international, multilateral and regional institutions. 
Athens, however, says the clause is conditional on use of the name Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM). The 1995 deal specifically granted Greece the right to object should another name be used, Greek diplomats note, adding that Macedonia has itself violated several clauses in the agreement. 
Gruevski says he expects UN envoy Matthew Nimetz, who is mediating the dispute, to come forward with more proposals soon. However, both sides seem fixed in their positions and in no mood to compromise. 
Economic hurdles  
On the economic front, the country also has goals for the new year. The government is taking measures to minimise the impact of the global economic crisis. Also on the front burner is action to decrease high unemployment rates, attract Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) and increase living standards. 
Before the global financial system crashed, Macedonians had been getting used to good economic news. In 2007, the country saw economic growth of 5.9%, inflation remained low, unemployment had moved downward, and FDI reached a record high level of 506m euros -- a 47% increase, year-on-year. 
In the first half of 2008, economic growth was 6%, and inflation fell to 5.1% in November. 
Late last year, the government undertook ten measures to protect the economy from the world's financial disarray. For 2009, the government plans capital investments of approximately 500m euros, or 7% of the GDP -- up 14% from 2008. Improving the road and railroad infrastructures and investing in the energy sector are also planned. 
President Crvenkovski, however, is not impressed. In his annual address to the parliament, he blasted what he described as the administration's overly rosy outlook. "A mistake that we cannot allow ourselves and might cost us a lot is to draw wrong conclusions and on the basis thereof to define wrong political priorities and concepts. The global crisis is not a chance but a threat to our economy," the president said. 
The opposition and some independent experts have criticised the Gruevski administration for its high levels of public consumption. Macedonia is facing a record budget of 2.7 billion euros this year -- four times higher than ten years ago and 50% more than last year's budget. 
Crvenkovski warns of declining production in key sectors such as the metallurgical sector, a decrease in exports, and record trade deficits. 
According to experts, the metallurgy sector in Macedonia will see a downward trend in 2009, as will exports. Moreover, stock exchange indices are not expected to increase, and there are fears of layoff of workers. 
Nevertheless, Gruevski and his cabinet remain undaunted. If morale alone could determine the future, the country would be in a strong position, as the administration has energy and optimism to spare. But will high spirits be enough to get Macedonia through in hard times? Difficult work lies ahead. During 2009, the youthful prime minister and his advisers will have ample opportunity to show if they are up to the job. 
