29/01/2008
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 29/01/08 
Novak Djokovic beat Frenchman Jo-Wilfred Tsonga in the Australian Open final Sunday (January 27th), becoming the first Serbian to win a grand slam tournament. 
During the match, the streets of Belgrade and other Serbian cities were nearly deserted: cafes were packed with people watching the action. Fans at the match held banners reading "Novak 4 president". 
Djokovic beat Tsonga, 3-1 (4-6, 6-4, 6-3, 7-6). However, tennis connoisseurs were even more impressed by Djokovic's play during the two-week tournament in Melbourne. On his path to the title, Djokovic lost just one set -- in the final. In the semifinal, he defeated the number one ranked player in the world, Switzerland's Roger Federer. 
Djokovic was born in Belgrade on May 22nd 1987 and started playing tennis at four, despite his father's wish for him to play soccer. He is currently ranked 3rd on the ATP list, was a finalist at the 2007 US Open and a semi-finalist at Roland Garros and Wimbledon in 2007, and has won eight titles. 
Former tennis champion Mats Wilander of Sweden says that "the sky is the limit" for the young Serb, "because he is constantly improving". 
"Djokovic's time is coming," Wilander said, warning that Federer and number two player Rafael Nadal may face a challenge to their rankings. 
Djokovic was overjoyed with the victory, which netted him a large number of points towards his ATP ranking, as well as around $1.2m. 
"This is something special … You spend two weeks here with all of the world's best players. Then you end up as the champion -- the one man who won the tournament. I cannot even comprehend what I have achieved during the past two weeks," Djokovic said. 
He thanked his family and all those who stood by him for their support. At every match, he was followed by his parents and two younger brothers wearing white sweatshirts, each emblazoned with one letter of his nickname – NOLE. 
 Djokovic said he wants to savor this win. "I will take it slowly. I am not going to think about achieving even higher goals. I am in no hurry, you know. I want to enjoy this success and celebrate it with the people who are important to me. We will see what I will do after that." 
Tsonga, who soared from 38th to 18th place on the ATP list after the Australian Open, congratulated Djokovic. "See you next year," he said. 
Djokovic's success was the pinnacle in a series of achievements by Serbian tennis players in Melbourne. Nenad Zimonjic won the title in the mixed doubles category. Ana Ivanovic advanced to the women's final and is now the second-ranked female player in the world. 
Jelena Jankovic also made it to the semi-final and Janko Tipsarevic gave Federer a hard time, finally losing in the fifth set. 
