15/05/2009
(Reuters, News.bg, Focus News Agency, Novinite, The Sofia Echo, Dnevnik.bg, Mediapool - 15/05/09; World Bank, Novinite - 14/04/09)
The World Bank approved on Thursday (May 14th) an approximately 150m-euro loan to Bulgaria to support health and education reforms and measures to buttress employment in times of heightened economic risks. 
"Bulgaria aims to speed up its convergence in living standards with its European neighbours over the medium-term, despite the current economic downturn, and increased productivity lies at the heart of this agenda," Bank Director for Central European and Baltic Countries Orsalia Kalantzopoulos said. 
The new loan is the third and last in a series of loans for social sector institutional reform envisioned in the Bank's overall strategy for Bulgaria for the period 2007-2009. 
The measures supported by that social sector programme are expected to help lay the groundwork "for enhanced productivity ... a better investment climate, and more efficient health, education, and social assistance systems", said Kalantzopoulos. 
Recent international assessments suggest that educational outcomes in Bulgaria are low compared to other EU countries. Moreover, while the country saw its school-age population shrink by 25% between 1992 and 2005, the proportion of students who drop out of secondary school is almost three times than that in other new members of the Union. 
Therefore, the new loan will support measures to raise the quality of education in Bulgaria, in part by improving school management and the external evaluation of students' achievements. 
The programme also seeks to help Bulgaria implement health sector reforms designed to make the system financially sustainable, to set the stage for improving the quality of services and to rationalise purchasing and reimbursement policies for pharmaceuticals. 
Furthermore, the new loan would help create new opportunities and incentives for individuals to join the labour market and to move to more productive jobs, the World Bank said in a statement. 
While unemployment in Bulgaria fell to record low levels in 2008, the employment rate remains low compared to most of the EU nations and well below the bloc's target rate of 70% by 2010. The expected economic downturn as a result of the global financial crisis could harm Bulgarians' efforts to find work, the Bank noted. 
The loan approved Thursday has a maturity of 17 years, including a five-year grace period, the Bank's statement said. 
It also quoted the institution's country manager in Sofia, Florian Fichtl, as saying that the "social sector reforms supported through this loan… have been complemented by measures to cushion the immediate social impact of the economic crisis." 
New official figures suggest the country's economy shrank by 3.5% in the first quarter of this year from the same period in 2008. 
