17/10/2007
By Antonio Prlenda for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo – 17/10/07
The top international envoy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, High Representative Miroslav Lajcak, says his office will shift its focus away from EU integration and towards economic reforms. The move comes after the country lost its chance of signing a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the EU this year, due to an ongoing deadlock over police reform. 
Speaking Tuesday (October 16th) at a Sarajevo conference, Lajcak said politicians in the country have demonstrated that EU integration is not a priority. Therefore, he added, they should at least reach consensus on economic reforms needed to raise living standards. 
Until now, the international community had been focusing its energy on the effort to hash out an agreement on overhauling BiH's complex, entity-based police system. Brussels has made further progress towards membership contingent on the reform. 
In particular, the European Commission has said all legislative and budgetary competencies for all police matters must be vested at the state level, that politics must not be allowed to interfere with police operations, and that functional local police areas must be determined by technical policing criteria rather than ethnic divisions. 
BiH's leaders, however, have been unable to reach a compromise that would both be consistent with the EU principles and acceptable to all the main political forces in the country. Brussels set a deadline of last weekend, after which the SAA would have to be put on ice. 
According to Lajcak, politicians in BiH's Serb entity, Republika Srpska (RS), have backtracked from commitments made in 2005. 
"It is the fact that representatives of RS rejected previously accepted obligations. But they are not the only ones to blame," Lajcak said. 
RS Prime Minister Milorad Dodik and the Bosniak member of the BiH presidency, Haris Silajdzic, have taken hard-line stances over the months. Although the two announced a compromise deal at the end of September, it was rejected by the EU as not being in line with its principles. 
"I expected more seriousness by the political leaders. However, the attitude of politicians has been as nothing important is going on and as if we still have enough time," Lajcak said. 
He told local media that the public will soon be able to see his new approach to the political situation in BiH. Under the so-called "Bonn Powers" delegated as part of the Dayton Peace Agreement, the High Representative has broad powers to impose legislation and sack public officials. 
Meeting on Monday, EU foreign ministers expressed regret that not all political leaders in BiH have shown willingness to come to an agreement based on the three principles. 
They took note of the upcoming Peace Implementation Council meeting, set for October 30th and 31st, saying this would be the next opportunity for the international community to take stock of the situation in BiH. 
