15/07/2005
By Marian Tutui for Southeast European Times – 15/07/05
Those travelling from the Balkans or Eastern Europe to the countries of the EU can look forward to breathtaking scenery and picturesque sights along the way. Because of problems with value-added tax (VAT) refunds along the Hungarian border, however, they can also expect a significant lightening of their wallets. 
After Hungary joined the EU in May 2004, it replaced Austria as a main point of entry into the bloc for travellers from Bulgaria, Romania, Serbia-Montenegro and other countries in Eastern Europe. New wickets for VAT were installed at border control stations in the south and east of the country. But flaws in the system make it difficult and in some cases impossible for tourists to receive full reimbursement of the VAT they paid for goods purchased in the EU. As a result, tourists lose hundreds of thousands and even millions of euros yearly. 
VAT reimbursement for goods valued over 50 euros, purchased in EU countries, is not handled by frontier authorities or the customs agency. Rather, the Hungarian Ministry of Finance confirms, it is contracted to limited liability companies that operate using hot currency. The wickets at Nagylak, Csanad, and Bors customs are open only for limited periods and have instructions in Hungarian only. Of the three types of invoice issued by the EU to allow the citizens of other countries to obtain VAT reimbursements, Hungarian border personnel accept only one. 
Tourists who arrive at the border at the wrong time, don't understand Hungarian, or possess the wrong invoice are thus unable to receive reimbursement or obtain any guarantee that they can do so later in their own countries. As a result, tourists involuntarily donate significant sums to Hungarian customs each year. 
The Hungarian authorities are only partly to blame. In the 14 months since Hungary joined the EU, neither the Romanian nor the Bulgarian finance and foreign affairs ministries have taken action to secure better co-ordination of VAT reimbursement. While members of parliament and government employees who travel by plane and obtain their refunds at airports may not face this problem, many ordinary citizens still favour the car. 
One option for travellers might simply be to avoid Hungarian customs. But that's easier said than done. The main road connecting Bulgaria, Romania and Serbia-Montenegro to the EU runs through Hungary; an alternative route would amount to a lengthy detour. If the situation doesn't change in the near future, tourist guides may need to include this border trap as a "local attraction". 
