25/07/2011
By Ljiljana Kovacevic for Southeast European Times in Banja Luka –25/07/11 
Months after the general elections, Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) is still waiting for a new government coalition as political parties wrangle over the division of ministerial functions in the BiH Council of Ministers. 
After months of political fighting, the two parties that won the most votes -- the Social Democratic Party (SDP) headed by Zlatko Lagumdzija and Milorad Dodik's Alliance of Independent Social Democrats (SNSD) -- have reached an impasse regarding the government. 
In addition, SDP candidate and the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, Slavko Kukic, failed to receive the support of Republika Srpska (RS) delegates. Most RS party representatives voted against Kukic, as did the members of both the main Croat parties HDZ BiH and HDZ 1990, and the Party for BiH headed by Haris Silajdzic. 
Kukic received support from more than half of parliament members in the first and second voting rounds on June 29th and July 14th, but not the two-thirds support needed from the RS MPs, which is constitutionally required for the BiH Council of Ministers appointment. 
"All that happened with my candidacy reflects the fragmentation of the BiH political scene and confirms that we will elect an executive government branch with difficulty. BiH wasted much time needed to address the EU envisaged tasks, without which there is not progress in the Euro-Atlantic processes," Kukic told SETimes. 
Party of Democratic Progress (PDP) President Mladen Ivanic says that the parties are not interested in forming a government, as they are constantly fighting. 
"I think that the state government won't be formed until the end of the year … [to draw] attention away from the poor economic situation," Ivanic told SETimes. 
He believes the state government will not be formed until the state budget deficit forces Lagumdzija and Dodik to come to an agreement. 
"By the close of the year, we are expecting serious economic problems and a serious lack of funds. At that time, we can expect a serious discussion on establishing a government, as the IMF imposed on BiH a condition for a new funding tranche only after forming of the state government," Ivanic said. 
Political analyst Tanja Topic, however, thinks that the recent talks suggest the government will be formed soon. 
She says that key leaders have no sincere desire to find a solution for the new government, but must find a way out of the political crisis. 
According to Topic, SDP has little room to insist on its principles, as the party risks losing the most in the elections and forfeiting its chance to participate in shaping the future of BiH. 
"If you really reach a compromise between the SDP, HDZ and SNSD in forming the new government, then the question arises why did BiH lose ten months and why was no agreement achieved immediately after the election?" Topic told SETimes. 
