05/02/2008
By Denis Dzidic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 05/02/08
After the 1992-1995 conflict, Bosnia and Herzegovina's (BiH) winter tourism facilities were almost completely destroyed. However, they have gradually been restored and are now drawing ever-increasing numbers of tourists. 
One sign of BiH's recovery is that the World Tourism Organisation ranked it one of the top countries in annual tourism growth -- with a 10.5% increase annually. According to the Madrid-based organisation, BiH will have the third highest growth rate in the world until 2020. 
The BiH Department of Statistics says most tourists are from neighbouring countries -- primarily Serbia, Croatia and Slovenia -- but a growing number are travelling from Germany, Italy, Turkey, Austria and the United States. 
Several new resorts and ski centres have opened recently, helping to increase accommodation capacity by 12.7% from 2006. However, the old tried and true skiing venues have also been drawing crowds. Mt Jahorina -- one of the major venues of the 1984 Winter Olympics -- has seen a year-on-year increase in guests in recent years, which has been matched by increased accommodation capacity. 
 Winter Olympic Park Association director Nedzad Ajnadzic says, however, that while improvements are evident, this only the beginning. "We are working on several projects currently. The first one is a cabin-type ski lift to the top of Mount Bjelasnica, the second is purchasing cannons to make artificial snow and the third is building an indoor hall for speed skating, to allow tourists to skate throughout the year and not only during the winter." 
 BiH Presidency Chairman Zeljko Komsic recently visited the Winter Olympic Park Association. "The Olympic image of Sarajevo should be honed," Komsic said, and promised government support for the upcoming projects. 
"We will try to generate interest among foreign investors to come and see that the Olympic area is worth investing in, and assure them there is an infrastructure system to protect their investment," he said. 
Last year, the BiH Tourism Association received the Grand Prix 2007 award at the International Tourism Film Festival for their advertising film "Enjoy Life Bosnia Herzegovina," which was aired on CNN. 
