19/02/2013
By Drazen Remikovic for Southeast European Times in Sarajevo -- 19/02/13
European football is facing its biggest challenge as a massive corruption and match-fixing scandal threatens the integrity of the sport. 
Europol revealed early this month some 680 matches, including World Cup and European Championship qualifiers and two Champions League games, had been fixed. 
The investigation found 380 suspicious matches in Europe and another 300 questionable games outside the continent, mainly in Africa, Asia, South and Central America. Investigators said 425 match officials, club officials, players and criminals from at least 15 countries were involved in fixing football games dating back to 2008. 
The extent of match-fixing may be greater than the numbers revealed by Europol, and local investigations are expected to shed light on more fixed-matches, especially in lower leagues. 
In response to an inquiry by SETimes, Europol said, "The on-going cases are in the hands of the national prosecution authorities and are beyond Europol’s responsibility. For now, Europol has no further comments on the investigation or speculation about the games, players and officials involved." 
Match-fixing -- where the outcome of the match is predetermined -- allows international gambling rings and criminal networks to net millions of euros a year, launder money and corrupt the sport of football. 
Most of bets are made in the East Asian market, where organised criminal groups work closely with European facilitators to buy players, coaches, referees and club owners. 
By knowing the outcome of a game, criminal networks can make sophisticated bets to make illicit income. The Europol investigation revealed a gambling operation that generated more than 8 million euros in betting profits and involved more than 2 million euros in corrupt payments to those involved in the matches. 
The advent of sophisticated online gambling over the past decade has created a multi-billion dollar transnational industry that is difficult to track and sometimes illegal and unregulated. In an interview with The Associated Press, Interpol chief Ronald Noble said worldwide sports gambling amounts to hundreds of billions of dollars a year, 90 percent of which is bet on football. 
Most of the "suspicious" matches identified by Europol were played in Turkey -- 79 -- but some were also in the Balkans – 18 in Croatia, two in Montenegro and seven in BiH. Media reports and investigations over the past several years have also implicated Bulgarian, Greek, Albanian and Macedonian football. 
"It is clear that all recent cases of serious corruption in football implicate organised crime from at least some part of the world but often from more than one region," David Forest, a professor at the University of Salford in the UK and author of several reports on corruption in sports, told SETimes. 
Highlighting the complex international and regional web of criminal organisations, Forest provides an example in the Balkans. 
"For example, the case of Pobeda, the Macedonian club suspended from UEFA competitions after the chairman himself ordered the team to lose," Forest said. "The club in this case instigated the fix but its payoff was achieved by selling the information to Albanian organised crime which would have the contacts to facilitate the placing of bets of hundreds of thousands of euros in the Asian betting market." 
Sylvia Schenk, the senior advisor for sport at Transparency International, told SETimes that there have been reports of match-fixing in the Balkans, but it is hard to quantify the scale of the region's role. 
"But the Balkans are clearly involved," she said. "That we do not have specific cases in all countries does not mean there is no manipulation, just that there aren't the investigations." 
One reason behind match-fixing is low wages and financial insecurity for footballers. A report published by SportAccord, an umbrella of international sport federations, said that the majority of footballers, especially in lower leagues, do not earn as much money as is commonly thought and face late payments and short-term contracts. 
"The lack of financial security among sportspeople should not be ignored," the report noted, adding that in the Balkans salaries do not allow players to live a "decent lifestyle, let alone an extravagant one." 
In Albania, for example, the monthly salary of a star player can reach 6,000 euro per month, while young players earn about 500 euros per month, equivalent of the basic salary of a civil servant in the country. 
As the fallout over Europol's investigation reverberates across football, responsibility to investigate and prosecute falls on local authorities to combat corruption and save the integrity of the world's most popular sport. 
The outcome of the investigations and authorities' response will have an impact on the public's perception and confidence that competition on the field is genuine, Forest said. Pointing to Asian leagues, he said endemic corruption and betting scandals led to "the collapse" of football. 
"Modern football is vulnerable especially because sponsorship and television rights income are such important revenue streams. Sponsors and broadcasters will be liable to withdraw for fear of endorsing what looks like a criminal enterprise," he said. "The threat to the sport from continued corruption is real." 
In Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), domestic authorities confirmed investigations are under way. 
"At this stage, the prosecution office can not reveal details of the investigation, but only that the investigation is on-going and actions shall be undertaken in order to detect the possible commission of a criminal offense," Adisa Karacic, spokeswoman for the BiH state prosecutors office, told SETimes. 
Elvedin Begic, president of the Football Association of BiH, said that so far the association hasn't received any official confirmation about match-fixing from Europol or other international institutions dealing with the scandal. 
"However, all this information will be taken seriously. We shall pay attention to this problem and investigate all cases which are suspected to be fixed. This will be done in co-operation with the investigative institutions," he said. 
"This will definitely affect poorly on the reputation of football, but it must be said that match-fixing is more than a local problem, because you can see for yourself that some European countries are vulnerable on that as well," Begic told SETimes. 
Mirza Dautbegovic, director of SportSport web magazine, the most visited sport publication in BiH, said that the Premier League in BiH was completely fixed when it was first founded. 
"There was a case in BiH a few years ago where the two clubs actually signed a match-fixing contract. It is tragic that our justice system does not address this but we have to wait for the German or some other prosecution to open an investigation. Conditions are now somewhat better … [but] this is more than fertile ground for match-fixing," Dautbegovic told SETimes. 
In Turkey, Turkish Football Federation chairman Yıldırım Demirören said that officials will receive a brief from FIFA on the vast Europol probe on match-fixing. 
"As far as we follow the reports, there are 79 matches monitored in Turkey," Demirören told reporters at a press conference on February 5th. "We have no details yet, but we will have them," he said, adding that "whatever this is, we will co-operate with Interpol and FIFA and solve the problem together." 
Europol's findings added pressure on authorities to address the still unresolved match-fixing and betting scandal in Turkey. Last year, the largest ever match-fixing investigation in the country, involving major professional clubs in about 30 matches, was uncovered by authorities. 
Recent findings suggest that Europol's probe will reveal new match-fixing cases in Turkey, which were not investigated in the country. Most of them are thought to be related to lower leagues. 
Last year's probe in Turkey has been controversial. 
Prosecutors in Istanbul charged 93 football club officials, players and coaches with attempting to manipulate matches from the top two Turkish football leagues during the 2010-2011 season. Those charged included Aziz Yıldırım, the chairman of Turkey's leading football club Fenerbahce. 
In the judicial process, more than 40 people were found guilty of match-fixing by a judge, but the verdict is pending appeal. 
In 2010, a court in Zagreb found 15 players, referees and a club owner guilty of match-fixing in the national league and sentenced them to jail terms of up to 10 months. In the case, known locally as "Offside," court documents showed that first-league games could be fixed for as little as $25,600. 
Officials in Croatia now say that according to their sources there is currently no match-fixing in the country. 
"Even though there is fertile ground for match-fixing in Croatia because players' wages are late an average of six months, according to our sources, after the scandal 'Offside' there has been no match-fixing," Mario Simic, president of the Croatian Football Union, told SETimes. 
"We are in constant touch with the players and encourage them to report any irregularities," he said, adding that the union is organising an education programme where Mario Cizmek, one of the participants in a match-fixing, will speak to the players about consequences of match-fixing, including prison time and suspension from football. 
