25/10/2005
(Bloomberg, Independent - 25/10/05; UN, AP, Reuters, BBC, VOA, RFE/RL - 24/10/05)
The UN Security Council on Monday (24 October) backed UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's recommendation earlier this month that talks on Kosovo's future status should be launched. The Council made the decision after being briefed by Kai Eide, Annan's special envoy to Kosovo, about the results of his comprehensive review of the province's progress in implementing a set of UN-set standards. 
Although the targets have not been fully met, a postponement of talks was unlikely to spur significant improvements and it is crucial to keep the political process from stagnating, Eide concluded. 
"Not withstanding the challenges still facing Kosovo and the wider region, the time has come to move to the next phase of the political process," the Council said in a statement. 
The 15-nation body reaffirmed "its commitment to the objective of a multiethnic and democratic Kosovo, which must reinforce regional stability". It pointed to protection of minorities, decentralisation, refugee returns, preservation of cultural and religious heritage and promotion of reconciliation as areas requiring particular attention. 
Technically part of Serbia-Montenegro, Kosovo has been a de facto UN protectorate since the end of the 1998-1999 conflict. 
The Kosovo Albanian majority, accounting for about 90 per cent of the province's population of about 1.9 million people, is pushing for full independence. Belgrade has made it clear that it wants Kosovo to remain part of Serbia-Montenegro. 
"I think it's quite clear that both sides come into this process with diametrically opposed positions from the outset," said Eide. "It's going to be a very hard process to bring them together." 
Former Finnish President Martti Ahrisaari likely would lead the negotiations process. 
Belgrade and the international community hold different views concerning the format of the talks, which could begin as early as next month. Serbia's leadership favours direct negotiations, while international officials say that they should take the form of shuttle diplomacy, at least in the early stages. 
"Desirable as it would be to imagine that you could have two delegations sitting opposite each other and start agreeing on status, it's not realistic," UNMIK chief Soren Jessen-Petersen was quoted as saying. "There will be a need for a status envoy to conduct shuttle diplomacy, move around trying to get a better idea of where the positions are, where is the flexibility, and on that basis try producing what could be a framework." 
