01/07/2011
(Tanjug, Beta, B92, Emg.rs, Radio Srbija, MIA, ANA-MPA, Actualno.com, Banker, Dnevnik.bg - 30/06/11; Zaman - 29/06/11)
The heads of state and government of the South-East European Co-operation Process (SEECP) congratulated Croatia on the successful completion of its accession talks with the EU during a meeting in Montenegro, on Thursday (June 30th). 
That major final step before the former Yugoslav republic's expected entry into the 27-nation bloc on July 1st 2013 will open the door for other Balkan countries hoping to join it as well, the leaders agreed during the summit, chaired by Montenegrin President Filip Vujanovic. 
The 12 SEECP member countries are Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Romania, Serbia, Slovenia and Turkey. The initiative was established during a conference in Sofia in 1996 with the goal of promoting political and economic co-operation with a view of the region's EU integration. 
The meeting, marking the end of Montenegro's year-long term at the SEECP helm, was held on the small Adriatic resort island of Sveti Stefan and was attended also by representatives of international organisations, including the EU, UN, NATO and the Council of Europe. 
Addressing the forum, Vujanovic expressed confidence that Montenegro will be the next Balkan nation to begin entry talks with Brussels next year. 
Croatian President Ivo Josipovic, whose country officially concluded its almost six-year-long negotiations with the Union on Thursday, assured the other EU hopefuls from the region that Croatia will push for the bloc's further enlargement when it joins it as its 28th member. 
"Croatia is your partner and friend," Serbia's Tanjug news agency quoted him as saying. "You should know (that) Croatia's accession will mean that the EU will obtain a member which will never get tired of advocating further enlargement and EU accession of all regional countries." 
He also pledged that his country will oppose the introduction of any new conditions or attempts to pressure those aspiring for membership in the EU. 
Serbian President Boris Tadic, whose country took over the rotating SEECP chairmanship from Montenegro, outlined Belgrade's priorities for its 12-month term at the helm, stressing the importance of building trust in the region. 
"During its SEECP presidency, Serbia will place a special emphasis on the fight against organised crime and corruption," Belgrade-based B92 quoted him as saying in his speech at the meeting. "Our future security lies in a comprehensive co-operation. That is a transnational issue, which goes beyond borders. When we do not co-operate, criminals do, that has to be changed." 
Further EU integration progress and resolving open issues in the region would be the other priorities of the Serbian chairmanship of the initiative. 
The Serbian president said he also hopes to see the investigation into allegations of organ trafficking in Kosovo finalised. 
On June 30th 2012, Serbia will hand over the rotating SEECP chairmanship to Macedonia. 
