01/11/2004
By Seremb Gjergji for Southeast European Times in Pristina - 01/11/04
Citing errors in the vote tally, Kosovo's Election Complaints and Appeals Commission (ECAC) has ordered a full recount of the 660,000 ballots cast in the 23 October general election. 
"A recount of ballots is the most incontestable and the most reliable way to eliminate mistakes and their impact on the results," said OSCE Mission chief Pascal Fieschi. 
The move could affect the number of Assembly seats won by each party, though it is not clear what the overall impact will be. Unofficial early returns showed the Democratic League of Kosovo (LDK), led by President Ibrahim Rugova, in the lead with 45 per cent of the vote. Hashim Thaci's Democratic Party of Kosovo (PDK) was second with 28 per cent of the vote, and the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo (AAK), led by Ramush Haradinaj, finished third with 8 per cent. 
The LDK fell short of an absolute majority and is expected to form a coalition government. Turnout stood at 51 per cent of Kosovo's 1.4 million voters. 
The ECAC acted after discovering numerous problems with the Reconciliation and Results Forms (RRF) used at polling stations throughout Kosovo. In one case, hundreds of votes intended for one party reportedly were assigned to another. 
"It was not easy to take this decision," said Chief Commissioner Janie Allison Sitton. "We investigated nine RRF sheets and eight of them turned out to be wrongly recorded." 
Recounting the ballots is "an enormous undertaking", Sitton said. "However, based on the evidence which the ECAC team discovered, all the commissioners agreed that no other course of action could be taken without seriously calling into question the results of this election." 
The process began Saturday (30 October) and is expected to last at least one week, according to Matthew Jenkins, head of the Elections Count and Result Centre. The ballots will be counted individually by hand. The head of the Secretariat of the Central Election Commission (CEC), Andnan Merovci, said the CEC would need to train and employ more people to deliver the final results as soon as possible. 
UNMIK has backed the recount decision. "We recognise the importance of the accurate and reliable election results, and fully support the CEC to take the necessary decision in this regard," spokeswoman Mechthild Henneke said, adding that UNMIK is confident that the CEC, together with the OSCE, will be able to conduct a thorough review as expeditiously as possible. 
Reaction among Kosovo's political parties was mixed. The head of the LDK's election headquarters, Melihate Terrmkolli, said the party had asked for a correction of the mistakes found in the tally sheets, but not for a total recount. The PDK and AAK have welcomed the CEC's decision. 
