16/02/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 16/02/05
Serbian deputy war crimes prosecutor Milan Petrovic has said he believes the domestic judiciary is ready and able to tackle cases turned over by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). 
 Speaking at an international forum in Belgrade earlier this month, Petrovic noted that Serbian courts are already trying cases related to war crimes committed against Croats near Vukovar in 1991, Muslims near Sjeverin in 1992 and Kosovo Albanians near Podujevo in 1999. 
 "The point of all the court processes is to serve justice," Petrovic said. 
Speaking at the forum, US Embassy legal adviser Sam Nazzaro urged both Serbia and Croatia to start implementing legal regulations establishing penalties for command responsibility in war crimes cases. 
Ivan Jovanovic, representing the OSCE mission to Serbia-Montenegro, said Serbia has made great progress in the legal field and in regional co-operation. He added that the issue of witness protection "will be crucial in future war crimes trials". 
However, NGO Humanitarian Law Fund Director Natasa Kandic said that Serbia is still not ready to hold war crimes trials. "I think there are still many problems in practice," Kandic said, noting that the principle of command responsibility was not considered in the three war crimes trials held so far in Serbia. "The political climate in Serbia, which prosecutors must abide by, prevented that," she said. 
Moreover, the prospect of transferring cases has been affected by Belgrade's erratic relationship with the ICTY. Expressing frustration with the government of Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica over the slow pace of co-operation, Washington has made it clear it will not back trying cases in Serbia until progress is demonstrated. 
Nevertheless, Serbian authorities have expressed hope the tribunal will hand over certain cases, including the cases of three army officers charged with war crimes near the Croatian town of Vukovar. 
In December, parliament adopted a law regulating the authority of state bodies in legal processes against war crimes indictees. It enables the use, in Serbian courts, of evidence presented before the ICTY. In addition, it establishes full protection for witnesses if they come to Serbia to testify, as well as granting them immunity from prosecution in Serbia. The law also guarantees the right of ICTY representatives to attend all phases of the process before a Serbian court and to be kept up to date on trial developments. 
