30/05/2011
By Aaron Stein for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 30/05/11
Istanbul is awash with the sights and sounds of the upcoming election. Buildings are covered in multi-coloured political party flags, street corners are filled with campaign volunteers and cars topped with large speakers patrol the streets blasting each political party's campaign song. 
Everyday volunteers from the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) are out knocking on doors, talking to shop owners, and meeting with local foundations to tap into the pulse of the electorate. 
With local campaign offices in every district, AKP volunteers have made it a priority to engage as many potential voters as possible before the June 12th elections. 
"Volunteers go to every building, knock on doors and try to explain our party's mission," said Zehra Taskenlioglu, general manager of Maya Project Management, a consulting firm working closely with the AKP. "We have found that meeting face-to-face and talking to voters about the issues is the best way to meet people, clarify misperceptions and engage them." 
Similar efforts by local volunteers helped propel AKP to parliamentary victories in 2002 and 2007, and local election victories in 2004 and 2009. Eager to keep its winning streak intact, the AKP is focusing on district level engagement, as well as utilising social media to capture Turkey's youth vote. 
Young volunteers are "using Twitter and Facebook to talk about what the party has done and what AKP will do in the future", said the head of AKP's Youth Branch, Ismail Karaosmanoglu. "[There are] more than 1 million young volunteers in AKP's youth organisation who are now working at universities and businesses throughout Turkey to spread the party's message." 
 With the election approaching, volunteers are stepping up efforts to meet with every voter in electoral districts. "Youth volunteers have a list of each voter in the district and are going to their homes and knocking on doors to explain the party's past successes and future plans," he added. 
According to Taskenlioglu, these efforts are bolstered by volunteers' efforts to meet with "every store owner and employee at indoor and outdoor shopping areas in Turkey to discuss how AKP can help them". 
On election day, political parties will send volunteers to each polling station to monitor the vote, oversee the counting of votes and give each campaign the early returns. 
With more than 200,000 polling stations in Turkey, this is no easy task. Party officials have organised three volunteers for each election box to ensure that balloting is carried out properly, according to Karaosmanoglu. 
This army of volunteers will meet at "5am on election day to go over their responsibilities, before being sent to the district polling station", Taskenlioglu added. 
A survey published in the daily Aksam and conducted earlier this month by polling company IKSara suggests the AKP will win 45.5% of the vote. 
"The numbers speak for themselves, and if the polls are correct then the election strategy is working just fine," said Saban Kardas, assistant professor of international relations at TOBB University of Economics and Technology. 
