28/08/2006
By Georgi Mitev-Santek for Southeast European Times -- 28/08/06
The Danube, Europe's most mysterious river, connects more than 80 million people in eight countries. It has witnessed the rise and fall of many empires, and treasures from some of the world's oldest civilisations can be found in its vicinity. While its westerly segment is popular, the river's Balkan stretch also has the potential for tourism -- a potential that remains largely untapped. Governments and the tourist industry in the region are hoping to change that. 
"It is necessary to work very hard, but with help and vision from the government [it can be done]," Mihajlo Todic, head of a Belgrade-based tourist agency, told Southeast European Times. 
Todic's agency, Oscar Tours, arranges itineraries for cruise line passengers making a stop in Belgrade. These tend to be older people because "youngsters haven't money or time", Todic explains. 
Typically, these visitors spend a day and a half at the most to see the Belgrade Fortress, Tito's tomb, the seat of the Karadjordjevic dynasty in Oplenac, and the monasteries of Fruska Gora. The city's more recent history is also in evidence: the ruins of the Yugoslav Army general headquarters and defence ministry are unavoidable. 
"Tourists are delighted with the city and with Belgraders, especially with its beautiful women," Tomic says. "They expected a neglected and ruined city, and in front of them is modern, vibrant metropolis full of friendly people talking foreign languages." 
The Western European stretch of the Danube has been a prime cruise destination for years. With one third of the cruise market, it bests the glorious Nile in terms of popularity. The number of people embarking at Passau, Germany -- the leading point of departure -- long ago exceeded 130,000 per season. Prices range from 1,340-3,760 euros for a ten-day cruise, to 4,200 euros for a three-week cruise from Passau or Amsterdam downstream from Konstata. 
But until now, the southeast Danube has enjoyed only a small share of the rewards. This region also has much to offer -- natural beauty, archaeological excavations, medieval monasteries and baroque architecture in the cities. At the same time, it is paying for decades of neglect. How can cruise lines be expected to favour a part of the world where there aren't even sufficient places to dock? 
Croatia has only two docks -- in Vukovar and Osijek (on the Drava). Camps and hotel capacity are lacking. Serbia has more than 30 small docks, but only six have a camp and restaurant. These countries simply have not built the infrastructure needed to draw even small-scale cruises, let alone five-star liners. 
This is a loss not only for the Balkan economies, but also for tourists. For instance, those who flock to the 900-year-old Benedictine Abbey in Melk, Austria would surely also appreciate Serbia's Holy Mountain, with its 16 monasteries. Tourists are also missing out on the untouched beauty of the Kopacki Rit nature park in Slavonija, Croatia, where they could also sample local specialties such as kulen, paprika-flavoured sausage and fish stew. 
From Sombor, one can cross the Danube near the Petrovaradin Fortress, also known as the Gibraltar on the Danube, and see the awe-inspiring Iron Gate Gorge, the largest river crag in Europe. Those fond of history shouldn't miss Russe in Bulgaria, where ancient stone houses, perched one on another, cling to the steep riverbank. Also a must is Bucharest, the "Paris of the East", which is also the site of the megalomaniac Nicolae Ceausescu's gargantuan "House of the People". 
Nature lovers will appreciate the Danube delta with its picturesque landscapes and a unique ecosystem, home to more than 300 species of birds and 100 types of fish. It is also the last European home of the pelican. Tourists in search of new destinations, and Balkan economies in need of tourism revenues -- it would seem to be an ideal match. With more development, better services and effective promotional campaigns, vision could someday become reality. 
