02/06/2006
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 02/06/06
One day ahead of the latest round of direct negotiations with Pristina, Serbian authorities came forward with their platform for the status negotiations. As expected, the plan offers broad autonomy rather than independence. 
Slobodan Samardzic, one of the co-ordinators for Belgrade's negotiation team, said Serbia favours an international agreement with Pristina, for a term of 20 years. Such an agreement would be signed by the UN and Serbia (as the successor to Serbia-Montenegro). In addition to its role as guarantor, the UN would also have specific obligations and responsibilities, above all in the area of security. 
Another co-ordinator for the Belgrade team, Leon Kojen, said Kosovo would have a constitution and independent jurisdiction in most areas. However, Belgrade would retain jurisdiction in foreign policy, border control, human rights protection, monetary and customs policy and the protection of religious and cultural heritage. 
Kosovo would have full financial autonomy. It would conduct its public finance policy independently, with the possibility of taking out loans with international financial institutions and acquiring direct foreign investments. 
Belgrade's proposal offers Kosovo Albanians "the maximum that a minority can have within a state," Kojen said. The document has been sent to the International Contact Group and to UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari. 
The Kosovo Albanian side, however, has said it will not settle for anything short of full independence. 
Kosovo Assembly Speaker Kol Berisha has said Serbia is aware of the outcome of the Kosovo status talks and is therefore trying not only to prolong, but also to block the process. 
"If Serbia continues to be destructive, the international community has another option, under which it will simply proclaim Kosovo an independent and sovereign state," Berisha told Radio Free Europe. UN deputy envoy Albert Rohan, who has been chairing the direct talks, has said Belgrade is advocating "unrealistic positions", although he also called on the Kosovo Albanian side to show more flexibility. 
Ahtisaari has said he expects discussions on the status issue to begin in mid-July. NATO, meanwhile, has said its troops will defend the UN-recognised solution for Kosovo and move against anyone who resists its implementation or otherwise violates the peace in Kosovo. 
