19/03/2007
(Deutsche Welle, Blic, The Moscow Times - 19/03/07; AP, Reuters, DPA, RFE/RL, Beta, B92 - 18/03/07; Reuters, DPA, Balkan Investigative Reporting Network - 16/03/07; AFP - 11/03/07; Reuters - 10/03/07)
Top Russian officials called at the weekend for the appointment of a new UN special envoy to mediate further talks on Kosovo's final status. At the same time, they appeared to downplay the possibility that Moscow could veto a Security Council decision on Kosovo that Belgrade opposes. 
"The situation that has taken shape between the parties must be discussed, and if no agreement has been forged -- we understand it has not -- the talks must be continued and a new special envoy should be appointed," Russian Security Council Secretary Igor Ivanov told Russia's Foreign and Defence Policies Council on Sunday (March 18th). 
A similar statement came from Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov a day earlier. However, Lavrov also hinted that Russia has not decided on a veto. 
"We cannot announce that under any circumstances, we would block a solution that does not suit the sides," Reuters quoted Lavrov as saying. "Everything will depend on the sides' positions." 
Fourteen months of largely fruitless talks between representatives of Belgrade and Pristina ended on March 10th, when UN special envoy Martti Ahtisaari announced that nothing more was to be gained. 
"It is my firm conclusion that the potential of negotiations is exhausted," the former Finnish president said in a statement, noting that the two sides remained far apart. 
Last week, Ahtisaari sent his proposal for a settlement to the Kosovo status issue to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. After studying the plan, which envisions internationally supervised statehood for Kosovo, the UN chief will forward it to the Security Council, which is expected to start discussing it in early April. 
The Kosovo Albanian leaders have accepted Ahtisaari's proposals. Belgrade, which wants to retain some degree of sovereignty over Kosovo, has rejected the blueprint as unacceptable and is also calling for the continuation of negotiations. 
While most Kosovo Serbs do not support Ahtisaari's proposal either, one of the community's moderate leaders was quoted as describing Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica's demand for fresh talks as "ridiculous". 
"Serbia cannot get that," the Balkan Investigative Reporting Network quoted Oliver Ivanovic, a leading official in the Serbian List for Kosovo party, as saying. "New Kosovo talks can only happen in the unlikely event that the debate at the Security Council fails to end with the backing of Ahtisaari's proposal. In that case, we could get a new negotiator." 
EU and US officials have voiced support for Ahtisaari's plan and have called for a swift solution to the Kosovo status issue. 
The proposal "provides a framework for a future stable, democratic and multiethnic Kosovo," EU Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said after for Ahtisaari declared the talks over. "A sustainable solution of Kosovo's status is needed, without delay ... The status settlement will have to be anchored in a clear European perspective, so as to enhance stability in Kosovo and in the wider region." 
