30/04/2007
(FT, New York Times, Washington Post, The Guardian, Independent, Telegraph, Today's Zaman - 30/04/07; AP, AFP, Reuters, DPA, BBC, VOA, FT, RFE/RL - 29/04/07; AFP, DPA, BBC - 28/04/07)
Turkey's Constitutional Court begins a hearing Monday (April 30th) on an appeal by the country's main opposition Republican People's Party (CHP) that could pave the way for early parliamentary elections. 
 Hours after the start of the presidential election process in Parliament on Friday, the CHP, which opposes the ruling Justice and Development Party's (AKP) candidate, current Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, challenged the legality of the first round of voting before the court. Insisting that the vote violated a quorum rule, the party asked that its result be annulled. 
Gul was supported by 357 of the deputies in Turkey's 550-seat assembly, falling ten votes short of the required two-thirds majority, and sending the process to a second round of voting, scheduled for Wednesday. Under the constitution, he would again need a two-thirds majority to win. If he fails to secure it, a third round will be held a week later, and a simple majority of 276 votes will suffice for him to be elected. 
However, if the Constitutional Court by Wednesday upholds the CHP's appeal and annuls last week's vote, the second round might not be held at all, or the entire election process might be cancelled, the Turkish daily Zaman reported on Monday. Then the country would head towards early parliamentary elections, currently expected in November. 
 One reason the CHP objects to Gul's candidacy is that Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan announced the nomination without consulting the party. Their opposition to Gul's candidacy also reflects concerns among secularists that his victory would allow the AKP, whose roots are in political Islam, to take hold of all key positions in Turkey. 
While largely a ceremonial post, the presidency carries significant veto and appointment powers. 
 Secularists worry that if Gul is elected president, he will help his key ally, Erdogan, boost the role of religion in all spheres of life. 
The military, which is viewed as the main guardian of the secular establishment and which has deposed three governments since 1960, issued a warning late Friday that it could take action against the AKP-led cabinet. 
"The Turkish Armed Forces maintain their sound determination to carry out their duties stemming from laws to protect the unchangeable characteristics of the Republic of Turkey. Their loyalty to this determination is absolute," the country's top generals said in a statement. 
 On Saturday, Justice Minister Cemil Cicek expressed the government's disappointment with what it viewed as the military's attempt to interfere in the presidential election campaign, deeming it unacceptable "in a democratic order". 
On Sunday, protesters filled the streets of downtown Istanbul to protest Gul's nomination. They chanted slogans not only against the AKP, but also against privatisation, foreign investment, and the EU. Many signalled support for the army. According to police, at least 750,000 people took part, while the Istanbul municipal authorities put attendance at 1.2 million. 
The rally, organised by a coalition of nationalists, parties and NGOs, followed a secularist demonstration in Ankara two weeks ago. 
