13/12/2010
By Bojana Milovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 13/12/10
As the international community hashes out the basis for beginning talks between Belgrade and Pristina, the idea of promoting national reconciliation between Serbs and Kosovo Albanians took many by surprise. 
Initiated by University of Belgrade Law Professor Radoslav Stojanovic three months ago in the Serbian media, the concept calls for a beginning from a clean slate, on the condition that both sides voluntarily acknowledge committing wrongs against the other. 
SETimes spoke with Stojanovic about his concept of a "final solution for the national conflict", its meaning and how it may be achieved. 
SETimes: What does national reconciliation really mean? 
Radoslav Stojanovic: National reconciliation is a model that is implemented when all other diplomatic methods fail. It happens when both sides in a conflict admit whatever evil they committed against the other. The process doesn't require trials and there are no verdicts to satisfy one side, while leaving the other dissatisfied. The most successful reconciliations between nations so far have been carried out in post-apartheid South Africa and in two cases in South America. 
SETimes: What concrete steps would lead towards reconciliation between Serbs and Albanians? 
Stojanovic: The conflict between these two peoples has been going on for around 150 years, and everyone is fully familiar with the main points of the conflict and its main trends. It is well known that when the Albanians ruled Kosovo, they persecuted the Serbs and vice versa. Now, all that is necessary for each side is to say "Here is what we did to the Albanians" and "Here is what we did to the Serbs." 
The proposal for national reconciliation should be sent to Brussels and the process should also involve the EU and the US. The EU has experts who know how this sort of process should be run. 
SETimes: From a historical point of view, what are the foundations of the Serbian-Albanian conflict in the distant and recent past? 
Stojanovic: During the war between Serbia and Turkey, the Serbs did the Albanians a great deal of harm, but then the Albanians took their vengeance, and hence we had 20,000 Serb refugees near Prokuplje in 1878. That is a very long conflict. The conflict from a modern history standpoint is the expulsion of 200,000 Serbs from Kosovo and the position of those who still remain there. That is not a technical, but rather a serious political and human issue. 
We have to establish closer and more direct ties to the US in the matter, because it hasn't moved a muscle to help Serbian refugees return to Kosovo, whereas it has done a lot to help Albanians return. 
SETimes: Is there a will to achieve national reconciliation between the Serbs and Albanians? 
Stojanovic: It will be very bad if there is no will, because there is no other way to resolve the issue. 
SETimes: Can the improvement in Serbia-Croatia relations and the positive signals sent by presidents Tadic and Josipovic boost the reconciliation of Serbs and Albanians? 
Stojanovic: I think the Serbian-Croatian reconciliation would be a good predecessor to the Serbian-Albanian one. The conflict between Serbs and Croats dates back centuries and since Croatia is more ready for reconciliation than the Kosovo Albanians, I think that would be a good start. 
