04/05/2009
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 04/05/09
The global economic crisis has slammed the Novopazarski Sandzak region in southwestern Serbia. The region, comprised of six municipalities, languishes with an unemployment rate of over 20%. Local politicians, fearful of the potential for turmoil, are urgently requesting aid from Belgrade. 
The region's municipalities boast a population of 200,000, half of whom are Bosniaks -- the highest proportion in the country. Sandzak's largest municipality, Novi Pazar, experienced strong economic growth in the 1990s with a booming jeans industry. However, imports of cheap goods from China and Turkey drove those local textile companies out of business. 
Not helping at all is the discord between the two leading Bosniak parties, the Sandzak Democratic Party (SDP) and the Party of Democratic Action (SDAS), whose activists clashed during the September 2006 local elections. One activist died in the fighting. To counter any sense of marginalisation, both major Bosniak parties are part of the Serbian government. The labour and social policy minister position belongs to SDP's Rasim Ljajic, while SDAS's Sulejman Ugljanin is minister without portfolio. 
When it comes to the economy, the rival parties speak with one voice. They warn that Sandzak needs Belgrade's financial aid, which is difficult to obtain with the whole country engulfed in the global economic crisis and instituting austerity measures. Within the Sandzak's dominant Islamic religious community, however, strains are apparent. One faction favours administration by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Riaset, while the other calls for self-governance by Muslims. Their factions, too, have regularly turned to violence against each other. 
SDP official Munir Poturak told the Southeast European Times that a prolonged crisis could radicalise the public in various ways, including religious. "Sandzak is already burdened by political conflicts and discord within the Islamic community, and the people are dissatisfied because of unemployment. In such conditions, the dissatisfied can be manipulated," warned Poturak. 
He said the government should help Sandzak citizens at least maintain their current standard of living and keep informing them of what it is doing to revitalise the economy and restore faith in the central administration. 
 "People have to trust the government in order to get out of this situation," Poturak said. 
SDAS official Esad Dzudzevic said "certain forms of radicalism" are already evident as a result of the global crisis, which is why spending by Belgrade on Sandzak's economy and infrastructure is necessary. 
One ominous marker of the fragility of Sandzak was the arrest of five members of the radical Wahhabi movement in March 2007. They allegedly plotted the assassination of several Sandzak politicians as part of a conspiracy to undermine Serbia's constitutional system. 
