18/09/2006
By Gelu Trandafir for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 18/09/06
Public opinion in Europe and the United States is not as different as some suppose, according to the Transatlantic Trends 2006 Report, released this month by the German Marshall Fund (GMF). It found that US citizens and Europeans share heightened concerns about terrorism and Islamic fundamentalism, as well as about other key issues such as immigration, the global spread of diseases such as avian flu, global warming, the growing power of China, and instability in Iraq. 
Large majorities on both sides of the Atlantic agree that these issues will pose significant challenges over the next decade, the report found. Some 66% of Europeans see international terrorism as an "extremely important" threat, up from 58% last year. Some 79% of Americans concur with that view, up from 72% in 2005. 
"It's clear from our survey that Americans and Europeans continue to feel strongly -- and increasingly similarly -- about those threats that most fundamentally affect our security," says GMF President Craig Kennedy. 
Respondents also agreed that a nuclear Iran poses a greater threat than the violence and instability in Iraq. Some 75% of Americans and 58% of Europeans view the prospect of Iran acquiring nuclear weapons as an "extremely important threat". By contrast, 56% of Americans and 45% of Europeans characterised the Iraq situation in similar terms. 
Co-operation between the United States and the EU to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons is "perhaps the most prominent example of greater consultation and policy co-ordination," the GMF noted in its report summary. 
Defying talk of "enlargement fatigue", the report shows continued backing for future EU expansion with 63% of respondents seeing it as a way to help the EU play a greater role on the world stage, and 62% agreeing that it will help promote peace and democracy along the bloc's borders. 
"It is good news for the Western Balkans," says Ivan Vejvoda, the executive director of the GMF's Balkan Trust project. Vejvoda says he is not surprised by the findings. "The French and Dutch referendums were not so much about enlargement, but mainly about domestic politics and also about the larger issue where is Europe going. There is an understanding that, after the World War II, Europe is a peace project supposed to avoid war, and that means that until Europe is whole and free, we would not see full security and stability." 
"What citizens want is a sense of certainty and security and from there it is a sense that we need to finish off, at least at this stage, the geographic enlargement, which means the Western Balkans. And then Turkey is, of course, an open issue," Vejvoda says. 
According to the report, Romania appears to be the most pro-American nation in Europe. Romanians are the strongest supporters of US President George W. Bush, as well as of EU-US rapprochement. Along with the Dutch and the British, Romanians generally back US leadership in international affairs. Romanian "warmth" toward the United States is at 73 points, well above the EU average of 47, and higher than Poland (59) and Bulgaria (52). 
Meanwhile, the survey also shows that public opinion in Turkey has cooled towards both the United States and the EU. Turkish "warmth" toward the United States declined from 28 in 2004 to 20 points in 2006 on a 100-point "thermometer," and from 52 to 45 towards the EU. Meanwhile, Turkish "warmth" toward Iran rose from 34 to 43. Support for EU membership has dropped sharply in Turkey over the past two years. 
"We are already worried, both in the United States and in Europe; we do not want to distance Turkey or alienate it," Vejvoda says. 
The good news is that younger Turks have warmer feelings toward both the United States and EU, above the average for Turkey. "The young generation is numerous and sees things much more realistically, that whatever the problems may be, Turkey's interest lies with the EU and the United States," according to Vejvoda. 
The Transatlantic Trends survey is conducted annually by the GMF in collaboration with Compagnia di San Paolo, based in Torino, Italy. It gauges public opinion on topics of current interest on both sides of the Atlantic. 
The 2006 survey examined citizens' views on the state of transatlantic relations five years after the 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks; the ability of Europe and the United States to co-operate in meeting international threats and challenges; European feelings about the EU in the wake of the Dutch and French constitutional referenda; the compatibility of Islam and democracy; the tradeoff between civil liberties and homeland security; Turkey's accession to the EU and its changing geostrategic orientation; and the role of NATO and the UN. 
This year's survey received additional backing from the Fundacao Luso-Americana, Fundacion BBVA, and the Tipping Point Foundation. 
