26/01/2010
By Zoran Nikolovski for Southeast European Times in Skopje -- 26/01/10
In the 20 years since the fall of the Berlin Wall, Macedonia has been building a multi-party democracy with all the facets of individual and minority rights. 
There are some aspects of communism during the days of the former Yugoslavia, however, for which citizens can be nostalgic: job security, health and education systems and the freedom to travel throughout the world. 
 "We experienced a national revival in the past 20 years, but the price we paid for our national freedom in economic and social terms is certainly high, yet worth it," Tatjana Hristova of Skopje told Southeast European Times. 
"Particularly hurtful was the visa regime which limited free travel that we enjoyed in the past, and also almost completely hampered the private sector," she added, noting satisfaction with the EU's decision to abolish the visa regime late last year. 
The path to democracy began in the late 1980s when the government of Gligorie Gogovski -- the last single-party ruling body in the country -- opened widespread debate about moving in a new direction. 
Before long, legislation allowed different political parties to register. The Albanian minority's Party for Democratic Prosperity and the Social Democrat Party were soon followed by many others. 
Then, a reformist wing of the Gogovski government -- including current National Bank Governor Petar Goshev -- adopted a social democratic ideology in 1990. 
Goshev is often viewed as the earliest opponent of Slobodan Milosevic's attempts to dominate Yugoslavia. In an interview with Utrinski vesnik, Goshev said that Milosevic personally forced policies for the dissolution of Yugoslavia. 
Macedonia's first pluralist parliament adopted a Declaration of Independence in January 1991. In a referendum on September 8th that year, more than 95% of voters favoured independent statehood. 
Macedonia's leadership quickly resolved to join the world's community of democracies, a decision reflected in its acceptance of the first UN prevention deployment mission (UNPREDEP) during the Yugoslav wars. To date, Macedonia has met the conditions for NATO membership and has implemented the necessary steps to secure negotiations for EU membership. 
Yet the effects of the turbulent 1990s are still felt today, as country recovers from an economic embargo imposed by Greece over a longstanding "name dispute", along with the loss of Yugoslav markets due to war and various sanctions. 
The progress of political and economic reforms was also slowed by the 1999 Kosovo war, during which Macedonia took in hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanian refugees. 
Socialism in Macedonia was synonymous with the communist dictator Josip Broz Tito. Today there is a political party -- largely symbolic -- called the Union of Tito's Left Forces. 
Yet many remember the secret files Tito's regime kept on people who struggled for the long-held ideal of an independent and democratic Macedonia. And a 2008 law to investigate current public figures for past co-operation with Tito's secret police has yet to go into effect. 
