09/12/2005
By Igor Jovanovic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade – 09/12/05
Chief UN war crimes prosecutor Carla del Ponte said on Thursday (8 December) in Belgrade that she is scheduled to submit a report on Serbia-Montenegro's co-operation with The Hague tribunal to the UN Security Council next week. She said that she hopes the country's actions over the next few days will give her reason to present a more positive assessment than last year. 
Del Ponte's report is very important for Serbia-Montenegro because talks on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) could be suspended in the absence of full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY). Lack of co-operation is not an automatic constraint on the SAA negotiations, but an option that the European Commission (EC) can use at any time during the talks. 
Del Ponte stressed that she expects more and better activity. "We are sure that we can find [Ratko] Mladic," she said at a joint news conference with Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica. Del Ponte noted that Mladic and Radovan Karadzic are not the only fugitives being sought by the tribunal -- citing Zdravko Tolimir, Milan Hadzic and Stojan Zupljanin as others. She said it is up to the cabinet to determine who is helping the fugitives evade arrest, and the ICTY intends to help officials to do that. 
ICTY investigators have yet to receive full access to certain documents in Serbia, she said, adding that this amounts to a type of obstruction. In response to Kostunica's pledge to provide unlimited access to its archives and send the ICTY the documents it needs, del Ponte said she would send a group of legal experts and investigators to Belgrade and hopes that they will gain access to all relevant documents, including those in military archives
Kostunica stressed that Serbia's authorities are working with the tribunal, adding, "only those who equate co-operation with only one of its aspects, the arrest of indictees, can say that there was no co-operation prior to April." 
"I would be much more content if our obligations to the tribunal were fully met," said Kostunica, adding that the cabinet "clearly has the will to finalise this co-operation, without obstruction or prevention of justice." 
