20/07/2011
By Anna Wood for Southeast European Times in Istanbul – 20/07/11
In a move that signals the heightening tension between the Turkish state and the Kurdish community, the Democratic Society Congress (DTK), an organisation that claims to represent the Kurdish population of Turkey, issued a statement last week declaring what it calls "democratic autonomy" for Turkey's Kurds. 
The statement was read aloud by Aysel Tugluk, one of the victorious independent candidates fielded by the Kurdish-backed Peace and Democracy Party (BDP). 
"We are announcing our power and will to govern ourselves," she said. "Democratic autonomy is not for the Kurdish people alone, but is rather a model for a solution that will allow all of Turkey's peoples to freely express their beliefs and culture." 
The declaration adds a new dimension to the impasse that has marked relations between the recently re-elected AKP administration and the Kurdish political body. After BDP's milestone victory in June's national elections, the court denied one elected candidate, Hatip Dicle, the right to enter parliament. In protest, none of the BDP-backed independent candidates have entered parliament or taken the oath of office. 
According to Henri Barkey, a professor of international relations at Lehigh University who specialises in Turkish politics, this declaration can be seen as the next logical step in the evolution of state-Kurdish relations. 
"The Kurds have been moving in this direction for some time now; it is not new," Barkey told SETimes. "They have decided that they will change the facts on the ground without waiting for the Turkish government." 
Barkey says the decision makes sense in light of the party's control of so many municipalities in the predominantly Kurdish southeast. From a psychological perspective, Barkey believes, this announcement is part of an effort "to push the idea [of autonomy] into people's consciousness". 
It is clear that there is still a long way to go before the Turkish public accepts such a premise, however, as the unity and territorial integrity of the country is a key theme of Turkish nationalism. An attack by the PKK on the same day as the announcement, killing 13 soldiers, only fanned the flames of Turkish nationalism by associating "democratic autonomy" with separatist violence in the eyes of many. 
Though an explosive issue, some question the efficacy of the pronouncement itself. In an interview with the Turkish daily Radikal, Kurdish politician and writer Tarik Ziya Ekinci went so far as to call the move "meaningless". 
"If they announce it, what's going to happen?" he asked rhetorically, continuing, "Let's say I go and announce my own democratic autonomy -- where's that going to get me? What's important is coming to an agreement with the state and the administration and creating clear formulas within the legal sphere." 
Yet the hopes and expectations of many Kurds in Turkey have been lifted. Mirbeg Tlax, a Kurdish software developer living in southern Turkey, shared his sentiments with SETimes. 
"In a living space where you're born without the right to choose, I perceive democratic autonomy to be at least a definition of how I can live," Tlax said. "I see it as one of the ways to distance ourselves from this period of war, which has been going on as long as I can remember." 
