30/06/2010
By Sasa Ilic for Southeast European Times in Belgrade -- 30/06/10
Vukasin Obradovic is founder and editor-in-chief of Vranjske weekly and vice-president of the Independent Association of Journalists of Serbia (NUNS). Dedicated to his profession, he tracks the most important events in southern Serbia. 
Obradovic has won many prestigious domestic awards for journalism, such as Jug Grizelj, Stanislav-Stasa Marinkovic and Dusan Bogavac. The OSCE Mission to Serbia awarded him the Man of the Year award in 2009. 
 SETimes: How would you describe freedom of the press in Serbia? 
 Vukasin Obradovic: Although according to the latest Freedom House report we have made some progress in freedom of the media, generally speaking, I'm not satisfied with the situation in this field. There are some limiting factors that affect the freedom of reporting and editorial policy of different media. 
 First of all, regardless of the constitution and proclaimed policies in the media sphere, the state still owns certain media and hence, affects their editorial policies. 
Parliament [has yet to pass] the law on the forbidden concentration of capital within media, so we still do not know who the actual owners of the majority of Serbian media are. This fact is of vital importance, since it creates the possibility for informal groups, political parties, certain lobbying groups and those we call tycoons to influence the editorial policies of media. 
Local governments, that is, the political parties in power, also affect the editorial policies of local media, which represents another form of suppression of media freedom in Serbia. 
The problem that [most] affects media freedom in Serbia is the tough economic situation, which puts the media in a difficult position. Without financial independence, there's no independence in editorial policy. 
 SETimes: You live and work in Vranje, a town in the far south of Serbia. Is the press freedom greater in southern Serbia compared to the rest of the country? 
 Obradovic: Well, it is difficult to give general estimations, but I believe that precisely because of the problematic economic situation and complicated inter-ethnic relations, the situation in the south of Serbia is worse than in the rest of the country. 
This part of Serbia is, economically speaking, at the very bottom of the list. The mere existence of the media in southern Serbia is brought into question; they can barely survive. In a situation like this, it is difficult to insist on high standards within the local and regional media. 
 SETimes: What is the main purpose of regional and local papers, and do they have a future in Serbia? 
 Obradovic: The role of local and regional media is big, since they are in the position to give, and they do give, a great contribution to democratisation on the local level. However, the situation with local media is very serious. 
There is a very difficult period ahead of us and it is highly likely that the majority of local media will phase out. Therefore, NUNS is preparing a kind of exit strategy for the local media, which will comprise several phases. 
First of all, [we will hold a] discussion with government representatives on assisting in drafting such a strategy and secondly, [gaining access to] actual assistance to provide professional development to help them cope better with the difficult economic situation. 
So, a general estimation of the situation with local media can be summed up in a sentence: The worst is behind us, the most difficult is ahead. 
 SETimes: Lately, there are more and more cases of local media being sued by local power figures, politicians or "controversial businessmen". Is this a new form of pressure? 
 Obradovic: Yes, it is a new form of pressure caused by the new circumstances in Serbia. These so-called "controversial businessmen" have become owners of various companies bought with suspicious money and every piece of writing on their shady businesses spurs their reaction. Apart from verbal threats and physical assaults, these reactions have lately turned into a form of pressure through pressing charges in court. 
 SETimes: Is the government doing enough, and in what way, to protect the journalists' integrity and profession? 
 Obradovic: The state does very little; it deals with consequences rather than causes. All you can expect from them is to provide you with police protection once you find yourself in immediate danger. 
 For me, this is unacceptable. We in NUNS expect, and will continue to insist, that the state create a clear strategy when it comes to media. Everything that happens is a consequence of the fact that we, as a state, do not have clear goals and there is no predominant awareness among politicians that the public, whose opinion is primarily shaped by the media, is the fourth pillar of democracy. 
 SETimes: You are the winner of several prestigious national and international awards. Do these awards suffice when you and your co-workers, even the members of your family, are constantly receiving death threats? 
 Obradovic: All these awards are some sort of compensation since they represent recognition of our good work. On the other hand, we are not in this business because of the awards; they are just the consequence of certain circumstances and our editorial policy that is primarily based on a critical approach towards reality and respect of professional standards. 
