03/05/2005
By Razvan Amariei for Southeast European Times in Bucharest – 03/05/05
Almost one half of the 3.8 million cars registered in Romania were produced more than 12 years ago. Most were manufactured by the local Dacia, Oltcit and Aro factories, which at the time fell considerably short of meeting Western safety and emissions standards. Some of the older cars are imports brought in from Western Europe after the end of the communist era, but these are often not well maintained. About 350,000 cars on the road are more than 20 years old. 
These 1.6 million vehicles are widely seen as potential threats to traffic safety, as well as a major source of air pollution. "The average age of the cars in circulation is 13.5 years. We can't ban them, as such a decision would have important social consequences. But we need to protect the air quality," the daily Evenimentul Zilei quoted Romanian Environment Minister Sulfina Barbu as saying. 
Authorities have begun taking steps. Under a scrappage programme launched by the ministry, owners of cars that are more than 12 years old can turn them in to scrap iron collectors in exchange for 930 euros. That money can be only used as a deposit on a new car. 
 However, the programme is not without its problems. The deposit money it provides is nowhere near the amount needed to buy a new car -- the cheapest of which costs more than 4,000 euros. In a country where the average monthly wage is 185 euros, and the average pension is 62 euros, many simply cannot afford to buy one. Most who drive older vehicles do so because it is their only option. 
Some have turned to selling their older cars to individuals who then exploit the government programme. The result has been a significant increase in the prices of old cars. "A few months ago, I would have gotten only about $100 for this 15-year-old Oltcit, but now I'm selling it to an acquaintance for $500. I'm happy and he gets a Renault Clio for $700 cheaper," said Bucharest resident Radu Marinescu. 
 Critics of the programme say it uses public money to boost new car sales, rather than creating a modern system of waste recovery and recycling that Romania lacks. "It's an action that doesn't comply with the EU rules. The impact on air quality will be insignificant, but large quantities of wastes, some toxic, will be generated," former environmental ministry expert Catalin Gurau told the weekly Capital. 
Another hurdle is insufficient funding. Only 12m euros were allocated, which means that only about 14,000 old cars will be eliminated this year -- less than 1 per cent of targeted vehicles. Nevertheless, officials have said the programme will be continued next year if it proves successful. 
